thank you all very much for being here and for all the support that you have given me over the years: as the mayor of this great city, as vermont's only congressman and now as a u.s. senator. thanks also to my longtime friends and fellow vermonters bill mckibben, brenda torpey, donna bailey, mike o'day and ben and jerry for all that you do — and for your very generous remarks. thanks also to jenny nelson for moderating this event and for your leadership in vermont agriculture.

i also want to thank my family: my wife jane, my brother larry, my children levi, heather, carina and dave for their love and support, and my seven beautiful grandchildren — sonny, cole, ryleigh, grayson, ella, tess and dylan who provide so much joy in my life.

today, here in our small state — a state that has led the nation in so many ways — i am proud to announce my candidacy for president of the united states of america.

today, with your support and the support of millions of people throughout this country, we begin a political revolution to transform our country economically, politically, socially and environmentally.

today, we stand here and say loudly and clearly that; "enough is enough. this great nation and its government belong to all of the people, and not to a handful of billionaires, their super-pacs and their lobbyists."

brothers and sisters: now is not the time for thinking small. now is not the time for the same old — same old establishment politics and stale inside-the-beltway ideas.

now is the time for millions of working families to come together, to revitalize american democracy, to end the collapse of the american middle class and to make certain that our children and grandchildren are able to enjoy a quality of life that brings them health, prosperity, security and joy — and that once again makes the united states the leader in the world in the fight for economic and social justice, for environmental sanity and for a world of peace.

my fellow americans: this country faces more serious problems today than at any time since the great depression and, if you include the planetary crisis of climate change, it may well be that the challenges we face now are direr than any time in our modern history.

here is my promise to you for this campaign. not only will i fight to protect the working families of this country, but we're going to build a movement of millions of americans who are prepared to stand up and fight back. we're going to take this campaign directly to the people — in town meetings, door to door conversations, on street corners and in social media — and that's berniesanders.com by the way. this week we will be in new hampshire, iowa and minnesota — and that's just the start of a vigorous grassroots campaign.

let's be clear. this campaign is not about bernie sanders. it is not about hillary clinton. it is not about jeb bush or anyone else. this campaign is about the needs of the american people, and the ideas and proposals that effectively address those needs. as someone who has never run a negative political ad in his life, my campaign will be driven by issues and serious debate; not political gossip, not reckless personal attacks or character assassination. this is what i believe the american people want and deserve. i hope other candidates agree, and i hope the media allows that to happen. politics in a democratic society should not be treated like a baseball game, a game show or a soap opera. the times are too serious for that.

let me take a minute to touch on some of the issues that i will be focusing on in the coming months, and then give you an outline of an agenda for america which will, in fact, deal with these problems and lead us to a better future.

income and wealth inequality: today, we live in the wealthiest nation in the history of the world but that reality means very little for most of us because almost all of that wealth is owned and controlled by a tiny handful of individuals. in america we now have more income and wealth inequality than any other major country on earth, and the gap between the very rich and everyone is wider than at any time since the 1920s. the issue of wealth and income inequality is the great moral issue of our time, it is the great economic issue of our time and it is the great political issue of our time. and we will address it.

let me be very clear. there is something profoundly wrong when the top one-tenth of 1 percent owns almost as much wealth as the bottom 90 percent, and when 99 percent of all new income goes to the top 1 percent. there is something profoundly wrong when, in recent years, we have seen a proliferation of millionaires and billionaires at the same time as millions of americans work longer hours for lower wages and we have the highest rate of childhood poverty of any major country on earth. there is something profoundly wrong when one family owns more wealth than the bottom 130 million americans. this grotesque level of inequality is immoral. it is bad economics. it is unsustainable. this type of rigged economy is not what america is supposed to be about. this has got to change and, as your president, together we will change it.

economics: but it is not just income and wealth inequality. it is the tragic reality that for the last 40 years the great middle class of our country — once the envy of the world — has been disappearing. despite exploding technology and increased worker productivity, median family income is almost $5,000 less than it was in 1999. in vermont and throughout this country it is not uncommon for people to be working two or three jobs just to cobble together enough income to survive on and some health care benefits.

the truth is that real unemployment is not the 5.4 percent you read in newspapers. it is close to 11 percent if you include those workers who have given up looking for jobs or who are working part time when they want to work full time. youth unemployment is over 17 percent and african-american youth unemployment is much higher than that. today, shamefully, we have 45 million people living in poverty, many of whom are working at low-wage jobs. these are the people who struggle every day to find the money to feed their kids, to pay their electric bills and to put gas in the car to get to work. this campaign is about those people and our struggling middle class. it is about creating an economy that works for all, and not just the one percent.

citizens united: my fellow americans: let me be as blunt as i can and tell you what you already know. as a result of the disastrous supreme court decision on citizens united, the american political system has been totally corrupted, and the foundations of american democracy are being undermined. what the supreme court essentially said was that it was not good enough for the billionaire class to own much of our economy. they could now own the u.s. government as well. and that is precisely what they are trying to do.

american democracy is not about billionaires being able to buy candidates and elections. it is not about the koch brothers, sheldon adelson and other incredibly wealthy individuals spending billions of dollars to elect candidates who will make the rich richer and everyone else poorer. according to media reports the koch brothers alone, one family, will spend more money in this election cycle than either the democratic or republican parties. this is not democracy. this is oligarchy. in vermont and at our town meetings we know what american democracy is supposed to be about. it is one person, one vote — with every citizen having an equal say — and no voter suppression. and that's the kind of american political system we have to fight for and will fight for in this campaign.

climate change: when we talk about our responsibilities as human beings and as parents, there is nothing more important than leaving this country and the entire planet in a way that is habitable for our kids and grandchildren. the debate is over. the scientific community has spoken in a virtually unanimous voice. climate change is real. it is caused by human activity and it is already causing devastating problems in the united states and around the world.

the scientists are telling us that if we do not boldly transform our energy system away from fossil fuels and into energy efficiency and sustainable energies, this planet could be five to ten degrees fahrenheit warmer by the end of this century. this is catastrophic. it will mean more drought, more famine, more rising sea level, more floods, more ocean acidification, more extreme weather disturbances, more disease and more human suffering. we must not, we cannot, and we will not allow that to happen.

it is no secret that there is massive discontent with politics in america today. in the mid-term election in november, 63 percent of americans did not vote, including 80 percent of young people. poll after poll tells us that our citizens no longer have confidence in our political institutions and, given the power of big money in the political process, they have serious doubts about how much their vote actually matters and whether politicians have any clue as to what is going on in their lives.

combatting this political alienation, this cynicism and this legitimate anger will not be easy. that's for sure. but that is exactly what, together, we have to do if we are going to turn this country around — and that is what this campaign is all about.

and to bring people together we need a simple and straight-forward progressive agenda which speaks to the needs of our people, and which provides us with a vision of a very different america. and what is that agenda?

jobs, jobs, jobs: it begins with jobs. if we are truly serious about reversing the decline of the middle class we need a major federal jobs program which puts millions of americans back to work at decent paying jobs. at a time when our roads, bridges, water systems, rail and airports are decaying, the most effective way to rapidly create meaningful jobs is to rebuild our crumbling infrastructure. that's why i've introduced legislation which would invest $1 trillion over 5 years to modernize our country's physical infrastructure. this legislation would create and maintain at least 13 million good-paying jobs, while making our country more productive, efficient and safe. and i promise you as president i will lead that legislation into law.

i will also continue to oppose our current trade policies. for decades, presidents from both parties have supported trade agreements which have cost us millions of decent paying jobs as corporate america shuts down plants here and moves to low-wage countries. as president, my trade policies will break that cycle of agreements which enrich at the expense of the working people of this country.

raising wages: let us be honest and acknowledge that millions of americans are now working for totally inadequate wages. the current federal minimum wage of $7.25 an hour is a starvation wage and must be raised. the minimum wage must become a living wage — which means raising it to $15 an hour over the next few years — which is exactly what los angeles recently did — and i applaud them for doing that. our goal as a nation must be to ensure that no full-time worker lives in poverty. further, we must establish pay equity for women workers. it's unconscionable that women earn 78 cents on the dollar compared to men who perform the same work. we must also end the scandal in which millions of american employees, often earning less than $30,000 a year, work 50 or 60 hours a week — and earn no overtime. and we need paid sick leave and guaranteed vacation time for all.

addressing wealth and income inequality: this campaign is going to send a message to the billionaire class. and that is: you can't have it all. you can't get huge tax breaks while children in this country go hungry. you can't continue sending our jobs to china while millions are looking for work. you can't hide your profits in the cayman islands and other tax havens, while there are massive unmet needs on every corner of this nation. your greed has got to end. you cannot take advantage of all the benefits of america, if you refuse to accept your responsibilities.

that is why we need a tax system which is fair and progressive, which makes wealthy individuals and profitable corporations begin to pay their fair share of taxes.

reforming wall street: it is time to break up the largest financial institutions in the country. wall street cannot continue to be an island unto itself, gambling trillions in risky financial instruments while expecting the public to bail it out. if a bank is too big to fail it is too big to exist. we need a banking system which is part of the job creating productive economy, not a handful of huge banks on wall street which engage in reckless and illegal activities.

campaign finance reform: if we are serious about creating jobs, about climate change and the needs of our children and the elderly, we must be deadly serious about campaign finance reform and the need for a constitutional amendment to overturn citizens united. i have said it before and i'll say it again. i will not nominate any justice to the supreme court who has not made it clear that he or she will move to overturn that disastrous decision which is undermining our democracy. long term, we need to go further and establish public funding of elections.

reversing climate change: the united states must lead the world in reversing climate change. we can do that if we transform our energy system away from fossil fuels, toward energy efficiency and such sustainable energies such as wind, solar, geo-thermal and bio-mass. millions of homes and buildings need to be weatherized, our transportation system needs to be energy efficient, and we need a tax on carbon to accelerate the transition away from fossil fuel.

health care for all: the united states remains the only major country on earth that does not guarantee health care for all as a right. despite the modest gains of the affordable care act, 35 million americans continue to lack health insurance and many more are under-insured. yet, we continue paying far more per capita for health care than any other nation. the united states must join the rest of the industrialized world and guarantee health care to all as a right by moving toward a medicare-for-all single-payer system.

protecting our most vulnerable: at a time when millions of americans are struggling to keep their heads above water economically, at a time when senior poverty is increasing, at a time when millions of kids are living in dire poverty, my republican colleagues, as part of their recently-passed budget, are trying to make a terrible situation even worse. if you can believe it, the republican budget throws 27 million americans off health insurance, makes drastic cuts in medicare, throws millions of low-income americans, including pregnant women off of nutrition programs, and makes it harder for working-class families to afford college or put their kids in the head start program. and then, to add insult to injury, they provide huge tax breaks for the very wealthiest families in this country while they raise taxes on working families.

well, let me tell my republican colleagues that i respectfully disagree with their approach. instead of cutting social security, we're going to expand social security benefits. instead of cutting head start and child care, we are going to move to a universal pre-k system for all the children of this country. as franklin delano roosevelt reminded us, a nation's greatness is judged not by what it provides to the most well-off, but how it treats the people most in need. and that's the kind of nation we must become.

college for all: and when we talk about education, let me be very clear. in a highly competitive global economy, we need the best educated workforce we can create. it is insane and counter-productive to the best interests of our country, that hundreds of thousands of bright young people cannot afford to go to college, and that millions of others leave school with a mountain of debt that burdens them for decades. that must end. that is why, as president, i will fight to make tuition in public colleges and universities free, as well as substantially lower interest rates on student loans.

war and peace: as everybody knows, we live in a difficult and dangerous world, and there are people out there who want to do us harm. as president, i will defend this nation — but i will do it responsibly. as a member of congress i voted against the war in iraq, and that was the right vote. i am vigorously opposed to an endless war in the middle east — a war which is unwise and unnecessary. we must be vigorous in combatting terrorism and defeating isis, but we should not have to bear that burden alone. we must be part of an international coalition, led by muslim nations, that can not only defeat isis but begin the process of creating conditions for a lasting peace.

as some of you know, i was born in a far-away land called brooklyn, new york. my father came to this country from poland without a penny in his pocket and without much of an education. my mother graduated high school in new york city. my father worked for almost his entire life as a paint salesman and we were solidly lower-middle class. my parents, brother and i lived in a small rent-controlled apartment. my mother's dream was to move out of that small apartment into a home of our own. she died young and her dream was never fulfilled. as a kid i learned, in many, many ways, what lack of money means to a family. that's a lesson i have never forgotten.

i have seen the promise of america in my own life. my parents would have never dreamed that their son would be a u.s. senator, let alone run for president. but for too many of our fellow americans, the dream of progress and opportunity is being denied by the grind of an economy that funnels all the wealth to the top.

and to those who say we cannot restore the dream, i say just look where we are standing. this beautiful place was once an unsightly rail yard that served no public purpose and was an eyesore. as mayor, i worked with the people of burlington to help turn this waterfront into the beautiful people-oriented public space it is today. we took the fight to the courts, to the legislature and to the people. and we won.

the lesson to be learned is that when people stand together, and are prepared to fight back, there is nothing that can't be accomplished.

we can live in a country:

where every person has health care as a right, not a privilege;
where every parent can have quality and affordable childcare and where all of our qualified young people, regardless of income, can go to college;
where every senior can live in dignity and security, and not be forced to choose between their medicine or their food;
where every veteran who defends this nation gets the quality health care and benefits they have earned and receives the respect they deserve;
where every person, no matter their race, their religion, their disability or their sexual orientation realizes the full promise of equality that is our birthright as americans.
that is the nation we can build together, and i ask you to join me in this campaign to build a future that works for all of us, and not just the few on top.

thank you, and on this beautiful day on the shore of lake champlain, i welcome you aboard.thank you for allowing me to be with you today, and thank you for your willingness to represent your constituents.

today, i want to talk about two major issues facing our country. the need for comprehensive immigration reform, and the need for an economy which works for all of our people, and not just a handful of people on the top.

it is no great secret that across the united states undocumented workers perform a critical role in our economy. they harvest and process our food and it is no exaggeration to say that, with out them, food production in the united states would significantly decline. undocumented workers build many of our homes, cook our meals, maintain our landscapes. we even entrust undocumented workers with that which we hold most dear — our children.

?despite the central role they play in our economy and in our daily lives, undocumented workers are reviled by many for political gain and shunted into the shadows. let me be clear about where i stand. it is time for this disgraceful situation to end. this country faces enormous problems and they will not be solved unless we are united. it is time to end the politics of division on this country, of politicians playing one group of people against another: white against black, male against female, straight against gay, native born against immigrant.

?that is why i supported the 2013 comprehensive immigration reform legislation in the united states senate. while a complicated piece of comprehensive legislation like this can always be improved i believed then and now that it is time to end the discussion of mass deportation or self-deportation. we cannot and we should not even be talking about sweeping up millions of men, women, and children — many of whom have been here for years — and throwing them out of the country. that's wrong and that type of discussion has got to end.

until we can pass comprehensive reform, we must be aggressive in pursuing policies that are humane and sensible and that keep families together. this includes taking measures that are currently available, including reforms through executive action.

i strongly support the administration's deferred action for childhood arrivals (daca) program. daca a good first step, but should be expanded. deferred action should include the parents of citizens, parents of legal permanent residents, and the parents of dreamers. we should be pursuing policies that unite families — not tear them apart.

i continue to be a strong supporter of the dream act, which would offer the opportunity of permanent residency and eventual citizenship to young people who were brought to the united states as children. it is my belief that we should recognize the young men and women who comprise the dreamers for what they are — american kids who deserve the right to legally be in the country they know as home.

as is often said, we are a nation of immigrants. for generations, families braved treacherous paths, often fleeing unspeakable poverty and violence, in search of better futures, for better lives for their children.

i, myself, am the son of an immigrant. my father came to this country from poland at the age of 17 without a nickel in his pocket and without much of an education. like immigrants before and since, he worked hard to give his family a better life here in the united states. he was a paint salesman and we were solidly lower-middle class. my parents, my brother and i lived together in a small rent-controlled apartment in brooklyn, new york. my mother's wish — which she never realized — was that we would be able to buy a house of our own and move out of that small apartment. through my parents hard work both my brother and i went to college.

their story, my story, our story is a story of america. hard working families coming to the united states to create a brighter future for their children. it is a story rooted in family and fueled by hope. it is a story that continues to this day in families all across the united states.

let me tell you that i have seen first-hand the impact of our broken immigration system. in 2008, my u.s. senate office learned about a crisis occurring with migrant laborers in the tomato fields of immokalee, florida. the immokalee workers were fighting to increase the paltry wages they were receiving for back-breaking work.

although far from vermont, in january of 2008, i decided to go there myself and investigate. armed with a letter of support signed by three of my colleagues — senators durbin, brown, and kennedy, what i found was a human tragedy. workers were being paid starvation wages, living in severely substandard housing, and subjected to abusive labor practices. the injustice in the lives of the workers was overwhelming.

in fact, the situation was so bad that on the day i visited two men were indicted for human slavery. slavery in the 21st century in the united states of america.

my visit to the tomato fields was followed by a hearing in the senator health, education, labor and pensions committee, on which i sat and which my friend, the late senator kennedy chaired. at that hearing, we heard the voices of the workers of immokalee — workers in america at the lowest rungs of the economic ladders. we heard from people who were ruthlessly exploited, denied decent wages, decent working conditions and decent housing. and that hearing enabled the workers of immokalee to confront the interests that cheated them and abused them.

i am happy to tell you that this story has a positive ending. the campaign by the immokalee workers resulted in substantial reforms in the tomato fields of florida. in the aggregate, workers there have seen their wages increase by millions of dollars and improvement in their working conditions.

but how many more immokalees are out there? how many fields or factories are there where people — often without legal status — are used up and thrown away? we cannot continue to run an economy where millions are made so vulnerable because of their undocumented status. we have to ask ourselves. whose interest is it in to keep undocumented workers in the shadows without the protection of the law?

many in the business community have argued for guest worker programs as the answer to the immigration issue. this concerns me very much.

as the southern poverty law center has documented, guest workers have been routinely cheated out of wages; held virtually captive by employers who have seized their documents; forced to live in unspeakably inhumane conditions; and denied medical benefits for on-the-job injuries. that is unacceptable.

in the u.s. senate, i have introduced legislation in 2007 that would authorize the legal services corporation to provide legal representation to guest workers who have been abused by their employers. further, employers under my bill would be required to reimburse guest workers for transportation expenses and provide workers' compensation insurance, among other things.

i also opposed tying immigration reform to the building of a border fence. let me say what most people already know. undocumented workers come to the united states to escape economic hardship and political persecution.

undocumented workers looking for economic opportunity come to the united states because there are no jobs where they are coming from, and there are jobs for them here. plain and simple.

unfortunately, american policy in latin america has too often made difficult economic and political problems even worse. take for example, nafta, the north american free trade agreement.

supporters of nafta told us it would increase the standard of living in mexico and significantly reduce the flow of undocumented immigrants into this country as a result. the opposite was true.

since the implementation of nafta, the number of mexicans living below the poverty line has increased by over 14 million people. almost 2 million small famers have been displaced. and in the twenty years since nafta growth in per capita gdp has been only half of that experienced by other latin american nations. not surprisingly we have seen a 185 percent increase in the number of undocumented immigrants from mexico from 1992 to 2011.

we as a nation have got to realize the importance of dealing not just with the issue of immigration but with the very real refugee crisis we face. it was appalling to me that last year when the papers were full of discussion of the large numbers of unaccompanied children at the borders there were so many voices insisting they be turned away or simply shipped back to their country of origin like a package marked return to sender. america has always been a haven for the oppressed. is there any group more vulnerable than children? we cannot and must not shirk the historic role of the united states as a protector of vulnerable people fleeing persecution.

the bottom line of all of this is that it is time to bring our neighbors out of the shadows. it is time to give them legal status. it is time to create a reasonable and responsible path to citizenship.

in addition to immigration reform, we must also pursue policies that empower minority communities. this must start with energizing latinos all across the country to engage in the democratic process and by thwarting efforts to disenfranchise minority voters. restricting access through draconian voter id laws and shortening early voting periods are thinly-veiled efforts to marginalize communities of color, low income people and seniors. these policies must be combatted at both the state and federal levels.

but to truly empower our communities, we must address the crippling poverty that affects tens of millions of people in this country. today, shamefully, we have more than 12 million latinos living in poverty. that's nearly one out of every four latinos in this country. if you are a latino child, there is nearly a one in three chance (32 percent) that you are growing up in poverty.

many of those in poverty are working at low-wage jobs. these are the people who struggle every day to find the money to feed their kids, to pay their electric bills and to put gas in the car to get to work.

i believe we need a major federal jobs program to put millions of american back to work. one in four construction workers are latino, and the fastest way to increase jobs is to rebuild our crumbling infrastructure: roads, bridges, water systems, waste water plants, airports, railroads and schools. it has been estimated that the cost of the iraq war, a war we should never have waged, will total between $4-6 trillion by the time the last veteran receives needed care. a $1 trillion investment in infrastructure would create 13 million decent paying jobs and make this country more efficient, productive and safer.

we also need to address the crisis of youth unemployment. the real unemployment rate for young hispanic college graduates is 11%, nearly double the rate of white americans. for young hispanics with only a high school degree, the real unemployment rate is 36%.

more than 50,000 latinos turn 18 every month, and the time is long overdue for us to start investing in our young people, to help them get the jobs and training they need, the education they deserve, so that they can be part of the middle class. it's time to bring opportunity to communities across the country. i recently introduced legislation to provide $5.5 billion in immediate funding to states and localities to employ 1 million young americans between the ages of 16 and 24, and provide job training to hundreds of thousands of other young americans.

we must also finally address the greed, recklessness and illegal behavior of wall street. financial institutions cannot be an island unto themselves, standing as huge profit centers outside of the real economy. their speculation and illegal behavior plunged this country into the worst financial crisis since the 1930s, and latinos were the hardest hit. latinos were disproportionately steered into subprime loans and around a quarter of latino borrowers have lost their homes to foreclosure or are seriously delinquent. in my view, wall street is too large and powerful to be reformed. the huge financial institutions must be broken up.

in today's highly competitive global economy, millions of americans are unable to afford the higher education they need in order to get good-paying jobs. some of our young people have given up the dream of going to college, while others are leaving school deeply in debt. many of the countries we compete with understand that free public education should not end at high school. in many european countries, students leave college debt free. that should be the case here in our country. i've introduced legislation to make all public colleges in this country tuition free.

what we need to do is invest in the latino community so that america can reach its full potential. i'm proud to stand with the latino community and receive a 100% voting score from the national hispanic leadership agenda last congress.

in short, i believe we can live in a country:

where hard working immigrants can have a path to citizenship;
where health care is a right, not a privilege;
where every parent can have quality and affordable childcare and where all of our qualified young people, regardless of income, can go to college;
where every senior can live in dignity and security, and not be forced to choose between their medicine or their food;
where every person, no matter their race, their religion, their disability or their sexual orientation realizes the full promise of equality that is our birthright as americans.
thank you for inviting me to be with you tonight. thank you for the work you continue to do as leaders in civil rights. you have always been a voice for the voiceless and champions for social justice.

your courageous history dates back to the montgomery bus boycott when one person, rosa parks, by the simple act of sitting down at the front of the bus, inspired a whole community to stand up and bring the transportation system in montgomery to its knees, to capture the imagination of the nation and to cause what my friend john lewis calls "a nonviolent revolution."

you knew then, what the american people are beginning to remember now — that real change takes place when millions of people stand up and say "enough is enough," and when we create a political revolution from the ground up. that is what the southern christian leadership conference has always been about. that is what is beginning to happen today. the american people are sick and tired with establishment politics, with establishment economics and with establishment media. they're sick of being told that they don't matter. they fully understand that corporate greed is destroying our economy, that american politics is now dominated by a handful of billionaires and that much of the corporate media is prepared to discuss everything except the most important issues facing our country.

i realize that many of you don't know me very well. so let me take a moment to let you know a little bit about my background. i was mayor of burlington, vermont, from 1981-1989, vermont's lone congressman from 1990-2006 and a u.s. senator from vermont from 2007 until today.

i was born in brooklyn, new york. my father came to this country from poland at the age of 17 without a penny in his pocket and without much of an education. my mother graduated from high school in new york city. my father worked for almost his entire life as a paint salesman and we lived with my brother in a small rent-controlled apartment. my mother's dream was to move out of that three-room apartment into a home of our own. she died young and her dream was never fulfilled. as a kid i learned what lack of money means to a family, a lesson i have never forgotten.

when i was a young college student, i came to washington, d.c., to participate in the march on washington for jobs and freedom. i heard this organization's first president, the rev. martin luther king jr., deliver his famous speech, and he inspired me, just as he inspired a whole generation — black and white — to get involved in the civil rights movement. in chicago, i worked for housing desegregation and was arrested protesting public school segregation. during that time i was active in what was a sister-organization to the sclc, the congress of racial equality of core, which was headed up by the late james farmer.

since i have been an elected official, i have used my influence to stand with those who have no power, and to take on virtually every element of our current ruling class — from wall street, to the insurance companies, to the drug companies to big energy, to the koch brothers to the military industrial complex. that's what i do.

the decision to run for president was a very difficult one for me and my family. i love my job as vermont's senator and love spending time in vermont with my four kids and seven beautiful grandchildren — something, needless to say, that i am less able to do today.

my family and i decided that i should run for president because the reality is that this country today faces more serious problems than at any time since the great depression and, if you include the planetary crisis of climate change, it may well be that the challenges we face now are more dire than any time in our modern history. and to address these crises we need leadership that is prepared to rally the american people, to create the political revolution that this country desperately needs, to take on the wealthy special interests that wield so much power.

let me take this opportunity to quote from an excellent article by the columnist eugene robinson which appeared in the washington post. here are some excerpts from that article:

as we celebrate king's great achievement and sacrifice, it is wrong to round off the sharp edges of his legacy. he saw inequality as a fundamental and tragic flaw in this society, and he made clear in the weeks leading up to his assassination that economic issues were becoming the central focus of his advocacy.

nearly five decades later, king's words on the subject still ring true. on march 10, 1968, just weeks before his death, he spoke to a union group in new york about what he called "the other america." he was preparing to launch a poor people's campaign whose premise was that issues of jobs and issues of justice were inextricably intertwined.

"one america is flowing with the milk of prosperity and the honey of equality," king said. "that america is the habitat of millions of people who have food and material necessities for their bodies, culture and education for their minds, freedom and human dignity for their spirits. but as we assemble here tonight, i'm sure that each of us is painfully aware of the fact that there is another america, and that other america has a daily ugliness about it that transforms the buoyancy of hope into the fatigue of despair."

those who lived in the other america, king said, were plagued by "inadequate, substandard and often dilapidated housing conditions," by "substandard, inferior, quality-less schools," by having to choose between unemployment and low-wage jobs that didn't even pay enough to put food on the table.

the problem was structural, king said: "this country has socialism for the rich, rugged individualism for the poor."

eight days later, speaking in memphis, king continued the theme. "do you know that most of the poor people in our country are working every day?" he asked striking sanitation workers. "and they are making wages so low that they cannot begin to function in the mainstream of the economic life of our nation. these are facts which must be seen, and it is criminal to have people working on a full-time basis and a full-time job getting part-time income."

king explained the shift in his focus: "now our struggle is for genuine equality, which means economic equality. for we know that it isn't enough to integrate lunch counters. what does it profit a man to be able to eat at an integrated lunch counter if he doesn't earn enough money to buy a hamburger and a cup of coffee?"

but what king saw in 1968 — and what we all should recognize today — is that it is useless to try to address race without also taking on the larger issue of inequality. he was planning a poor people's march on washington that would include not only african-americans but also latinos, native americans and poor appalachian whites. he envisioned a rainbow of the dispossessed, assembled to demand not just an end to discrimination but a change in the way the economy doles out its spoils."

and that is the theme that i wish to pursue this evening. the need to simultaneously address the structural and institutional racism which exists in this country, while at the same time we vigorously attack the grotesque level of income and wealth inequality which is making the very rich much richer while everyone else — especially the african-american community and working-class whites — are becoming poorer.

let's go to an issue that is rightly on everyone's mind, the continuing struggle for racial justice in america and the need to combat structural racism. let's start with the facts. the horrible facts.

if current trends continue, one in four black males born today can expect to spend time in prison during their lifetime. this is an unspeakable tragedy.
blacks are imprisoned at six times the rate of whites.
people of color are incarcerated, policed and sentenced to death at significantly higher rates than their white counterparts.
one in every 15 african-american men is incarcerated, compared to one in every 106 white men.
a report by the department of justice found that blacks were three times more likely to be searched during a traffic stop, compared to white motorists.
african-americans are twice as likely to be arrested and almost four times as likely to experience the use of force during encounters with the police.
african-americans make up two-fifths of confined youth today.
african-american women are three times more likely than white women to be incarcerated.
once convicted, black offenders receive longer sentences (10 percent longer) than white offenders for the same crimes.
thirteen percent of african-american men have lost the right to vote due to felony convictions.
but as bad as those statistics are, and they are indeed a tragedy, the situation for many people of color is worse yet.

too many african-americans today are simultaneously having to deal the crisis of racial justice while coping with the effects of poverty and economic deprivation, such as drugs, crime, and despair.

of course the majority of people of color are trying to work hard, play by the rules and raise their children. but there are neighborhoods where mothers are afraid to let their children outside for fear of gang violence and drugs. and they are also afraid of their children being targeted by the police because of the color of their skin. no person should have to worry that a routine interaction with law enforcement will end in violence or death.

as martin luther king, jr., said; law and order exist for the purpose of establishing justice and when they fail in this purpose they become the dangerously structured dams that block the flow of social progress.

across the nation, too many african-americans and other minorities find themselves subjected to a system that treats citizens who have not committed crimes like criminals. a growing number of communities do not trust the police and police have become disconnected from the communities they are sworn to protect.

sandra bland, michael brown, rekia boyd, eric garner, walter scott, freddie gray, tamir rice. we know their names. each of them died unarmed at the hands of police officers or in police custody. the chants are growing louder. people are angry. i am angry. and people have a right to be angry. violence and brutality of any kind, particularly at the hands of law enforcement sworn to protect and serve our communities, is unacceptable and must not be tolerated.

we must reform our criminal justice system. black lives do matter. and we must value black lives.

we must move away from the militarization of police forces. we must invest in community policing. only when we get officers into the communities, working within the neighborhoods before trouble arises, do we really develop the relationships necessary to make our communities safer.

we need a federal initiative to completely redo how we train police officers in this country and give them body cameras. states and localities that make progress in this area should get more federal justice grant money. those that do not should get their funding slashed. the measure of success for law enforcement should not be how many people get locked up.

for people who have committed crimes that have landed them in jail, there needs to be a path back from prison. the federal system of parole needs to be reinstated. we need real education and real skills training for the incarcerated.

we must end the over incarceration of non-violent young americans who do not pose a serious threat to our society. it is an international embarrassment that we have more people locked up in jail than any other country on earth — more than even the communist totalitarian state of china. that has got to end.

the war on drugs has been a failure and has ruined the lives of too many people. african-americans comprise 14 percent of regular drug users but are 37 percent of those arrested for drug offenses. from 1980 to 2007, about one in three adults arrested for drugs was african-american.

it is an obscenity that we stigmatize so many young americans with a criminal record for smoking marijuana, but not one major wall street executive has been prosecuted for causing the near collapse of our entire economy. this must change.

we need to end prisons for profit, which result in an over-incentive to arrest, jail and detain, in order to keep prison beds full. we need to invest in drug courts and medical and mental health interventions for people with substance abuse problems, so that they do not end up in prison, they end up in treatment.

but we have to go beyond just violence perpetuated by the state. as we saw so horribly in south carolina, there are still those who seek to terrorize the african american community with violence and intimidation. we need to make sure the federal resources are there to crack down on the illegal activities of hate groups. we need a new social movement to let all the racist haters out there know that they will no longer be accepted in a civilized society.

in addition to the physical violence faced by too many in our country we need look at the lives of black children and address a few other difficult facts. black children, who make up just 18 percent of preschoolers, account for 48 percent of all out-of-school suspensions before kindergarten. we are failing our black children before kindergarten! black students were expelled at three times the rate of white students. black girls were suspended at higher rates than all other girls and most boys. according to the department of education, african american students are more likely to suffer harsh punishments — suspensions and arrests — at school.

we need to take a hard look at education system. black students attended schools with higher concentrations of first-year teachers, compared with white students. black students were more than three times as likely to attend schools where fewer than 60 percent of teachers meet all state certification and licensure requirements.

we must get into our schools and keep kids in school. we must ensure that children graduate from high school and don't drop out. this is a complicated problem and i'm not going to stand here and say i have all the answers.

but one thing that will help kids stay in school is if they have a belief that they will be able to get a college education. for too many families college seems like an impossibility. we have got to change that. we need to give our children, regardless of their race or their income, a fair shot at attending college. that's why i support making all public universities tuition free.

communities of color also face the violence of economic deprivation. let's be frank: neighborhoods like those in west baltimore, where freddie gray resided, suffer the most. however, the problem of economic immobility isn't just a problem for young men like freddie gray. it has become a problem for millions of americans who, despite hard-work and the will to get ahead, can spend their entire lives struggling to survive on the economic treadmill.

we live at a time when most americans don't have $10,000 in savings, and millions of working adults have no idea how they will ever retire in dignity. god forbid, they are confronted with an unforeseen car accident, a medical emergency, or the loss of a job. it would literally send their lives into an economic tailspin. and the problems are even more serious when we consider race.

most black and latino households have less than $350 in savings. the black unemployment rate has remained roughly twice as high as the white rate over the last 40 years, regardless of education. this is unacceptable. the american people in general, want change — they want a better deal. a fairer deal. a new deal. they want an america with laws and policies that truly reward hard work with economic mobility. they want an america that affords all of its citizens with the economic security to take risks and the opportunity to realize their full potential.

income and wealth inequality

today, we live in the wealthiest nation in the history of the world, but that reality means little because almost all of that wealth is controlled by a tiny handful of individuals.

there is something profoundly wrong when the top one-tenth of 1 percent owns almost as much wealth as the bottom 90 percent, and when 99 percent of all new income goes to the top 1 percent. there is something profoundly wrong when we have a proliferation of millionaires and billionaires at the same time as millions of americans work longer hours for lower wages and we have the highest rate of childhood poverty of any major country on earth. there is something profoundly wrong when one family owns more wealth than the bottom 130 million americans. this grotesque level of inequality is immoral. it is bad economics. it is unsustainable. that is why we need a tax system that is fair and progressive, which makes wealthy individuals and profitable corporations begin to pay their fair share of taxes. this type of rigged economy is not what america is supposed to be about. this has got to change and, together we will change it.

we need to send a message to the billionaire class: "you can't have it all. you can't get huge tax breaks while children in this country go hungry. you can't continue sending our jobs to china while millions are looking for work. you can't hide your profits in the cayman islands and other tax havens, while there are massive unmet needs on every corner of this nation. your greed has got to end. you cannot take advantage of all the benefits of america, if you refuse to accept your responsibilities as americans."

economics

but it is not just income and wealth inequality. it is the tragic reality that for the last 40 years the great middle class of our country — once the envy of the world — has been disappearing. despite exploding technology and increased worker productivity, median family income is almost $5,000 less than it was in 1999. throughout this country it is not uncommon for people to be working two or three jobs just to cobble together enough income and some health care benefits to survive.

the truth is that real unemployment is not the 5.5 percent you read in newspapers. it is close to 11 percent if you include those workers who have given up looking for jobs or who are working part-time when they want to work full-time. and here is something we don't hear much about. according to a recent analysis of census bureau data by the economic policy institute, real youth unemployment in this country has reached crisis proportions. if you include those who are not working, who have given up looking for work or who are working part-time, white high school graduates aged 17-20 have an unemployment rate of 33 percent, hispanics in the same age group have an unemployment rate of 36 percent while black youth have an unemployment rate of 51 percent. today, shamefully, we have 45 million people living in poverty, many of whom are working at low-wage jobs.

raising wages and benefits

let us be honest and acknowledge that millions of americans are now working for totally inadequate wages. the current federal minimum wage of $7.25 an hour is a starvation wage and must be raised. the minimum wage must become a living wage — which means raising it to $15 an hour over the next few years. the benchmark of full time work in america should be simple and concrete — that no full-time worker should live in poverty.

and a living wage should not only be fair, it should be equitable. that is why we must establish pay equity for women workers by law. it's unconscionable that women earn 78 cents on the dollar compared to men who perform the same work. we must also end the scandal in which millions of american employees, often earning less than $30,000 a year, work 50 or 60 hours a week — and earn no overtime.

further, the united states must end the international embarrassment of being the only major country on earth, the only one, which does not guarantee workers paid medical and family leave, paid sick time and paid vacation time. last place is no place for america. that is why i will fight for 12 weeks of paid family leave, at least 10 days of paid vacation time and seven days of paid sick time. my republican colleagues talk a lot about "family values." well, let me be very clear. it is not a family value to force the mother of a new born baby to go back to work a few days after she gives birth, because she doesn't have the money to stay home and bond with her baby. that is not a family value. that is an insult to everything that i know about what family is about.

today, as a result of the collapse of our middle class and declining wages, the american people are working longer hours than the people of any other country — 137 hours a year more than the japanese, 260 more hours per year than the british and 499 hours a year more than the french. well, 100 years later we still have not achieved that. incredibly, today, 85 percent of working men and 66 percent of working women work more than 40 hours a week. and do you know what? many workers in this country get no or very little paid vacation time. that has got to end.

protecting our most vulnerable

at a time when millions of americans are struggling to keep their heads above water economically, at a time when senior poverty is increasing, at a time when millions of kids are living in dire poverty my republican colleagues are trying to make a terrible situation even worse. if you can believe it, the republican budget throws 27 million americans off health insurance, makes drastic cuts in medicare, throws millions of low income americans, including pregnant women off nutrition programs, and makes it harder for working-class families to afford college or put their kids into head start. and then, to add insult to injury, they provide huge tax breaks for the very, very wealthiest families in this country while they raise taxes on working families.

well, let me tell my republican colleagues that i respectfully disagree with their approach. instead of cutting social security, we need to expand social security benefits. instead of cutting head start and childcare, we need to move to a universal pre-k system for all the children of this country. as franklin delano roosevelt reminded us: "the test of our progress is not whether we add more to the abundance of those who have much, it is whether we provide enough for those who have little." and that is a test that we as a nation must once again meet and master.

we need to make health care a basic right in our society.

we need to make sure every parent has quality affordable child care and where all of our qualified young people, regardless of income, can go to college, by making a 4-year education at every public college and university in this country free. if germany, sweden and denmark can afford to do this, then so can we.

we need to invest in jobs and job training, rather than to be building more and more jails and to be locking up more and more people. that is why i have submitted legislation to spend $5.5 billion dollars to fund job-training programs for inner city youth. instead of building more and more prisons, we need to be building more and more meaningful lives where young people can have a future, not be stuck in a dead end with no hope or opportunity.

if we are serious about reversing the decline of the middle class we need a major federal jobs program that puts millions of americans back to work at decent paying jobs. at a time when our roads, bridges, water systems, rail and airports are decaying, the most effective way to rapidly create meaningful jobs is to rebuild our crumbling infrastructure. that's why i've introduced legislation that would invest $1 trillion over 5 years to modernize our country's physical infrastructure. this legislation would create and maintain at least 13 million good-paying jobs, while making our country more productive, efficient and safe. and i commit to you that as president, i will lead that legislation into law.

this is an ambitious program that would lift millions of families out of poverty and provide a pathway to greater economic security for all americans. the right to a college education, the right to health care, and a guaranteed right to employment. it will not heal all wounds or relieve all tensions, but it would go beyond anything we have tried before, and it would send a clear signal that black lives matter.

citizens united and campaign finance reform and voting rights

i want to talk about our democracy. the billionaire class is controlling our political and economic lives because of the disastrous citizens united case. the supreme court unconscionably gutted the voting rights act. make no mistake, we watching the erosion of our democracy and the gains that we have fought so hard to achieve.

some of you may not see the connection between an out-of-control campaign financing system and the gutting of our voting rights, but you should not be fooled — they are two sides of the same coin. our access to our democracy is being ripped away. the billionaires do not want people to vote.

my friends — let me be as blunt as i can while telling you what you already know. as a result of the disastrous supreme court decision in the citizens united case, the american political system has been totally corrupted, and the foundations of american democracy are being undermined. what the supreme court essentially said was that it was not good enough for the billionaire class to own much of our economy. they could now own the u.s. government as well. and that is precisely what they are trying to do.

if we are serious about creating jobs, about climate change and the needs of our children, our veterans and the elderly, about reforming our criminal justice system, we must be deadly serious about campaign finance reform. that is why in my campaign for president, i have said that i will not nominate any justice to the supreme court who has not made it clear that he or she will move to overturn that disastrous decision which is undermining our democracy. long term, we need to go further and establish public funding of elections, so that the dark money of american politics is stopped before democracy is bought and paid for by a handful of billionaires and corporations.

american democracy is not about corporations and billionaires being able to buy candidates and elections. it is not about wall street and big oil or the koch brothers and sheldon adelson spending billions of dollars to elect candidates who will make the rich richer and everyone else poorer. according to media reports the koch brothers alone, one family, will spend more money in this election cycle than either the democratic or republican parties. this is not democracy. this is oligarchy. the defining principle of american democracy is one person, one vote — with every citizen having an equal say — and no voter suppression. and that's the kind of american political system we have to fight for.

not only are big moneyed interests trying to buy the american electorate, republican-controlled legislatures have done everything in their power to make it more difficult to vote.

voting is becoming more difficult, not less. the voting rights act has been gutted by the supreme court, and efforts to repair it in congress have been sidelined. voter suppression today is alive and well in the form of unnecessary voter id laws, restrictions on registering to vote, improper purging of voter rolls, felon disenfranchisement, and a staggering array of deceptive practices that are preventing eligible voters from participating in the political process. it is embarrassing that the united states' voting system is so dysfunctional.

we need to remember the price that was paid for the right to vote. we must restore our democracy's promise of one man, one vote. we must repeal citizens united and take the political process back from the billionaire class. we need to extend early voting, extend voting hours, make election day a holiday or move it to a weekend.

one area that i have been interested in is voter registration. unsurprisingly, most other advanced democracies make voter registration much easier than we do here in the united states. some countries, such as argentina, belgium, and germany, maintain a national or municipal population database and local election officials add eligible voters to the rolls based on those lists. some countries hire workers to go door-to-door and register all eligible voters, including great britain and indonesia. mexico deploys such workers to rural areas.

france automatically registers 18-year-olds to vote when they register with the selective service. canada uses info collected from other government agencies to add eligible citizens to the rolls—british columbia uses dmv records; quebec uses health insurance records. if more info is needed, the government reaches out by mail and sends the potential voter a registration form, with a postage-paid return envelope.

the u.s. is one of the few countries which puts the onus of registration on the voter, not the state. this is ridiculous.

in 2009, the brennan center released a study of worldwide voter registration rates, based on citizen voting-age population. here are a few countries:

argentina (2007): 100%
great britain (2008): 97%
belgium (2007): 94%
canada (2008): 93%
germany (2005): 93%
australia (2008): 92%
france (2007): 91%
united states (2006): 68%
the census bureau population survey says in 2012, 71.2 percent of americans were registered to vote. the number varies by age—only 58 percent of 18-29-year-olds were registered to vote, but 79 percent of those older than 70 were registered.

we should be making voting easier, not harder.

let us also be very clear that the stakes are very high. the right to vote is preservative of all other rights. and when in this last election in november 63 percent of the american people chose not to vote; 80 percent of young people chose not to vote; and almost 75 percent of low-income workers chose not to vote, it should not come as a surprise that the stranglehold that the billionaire class has on the economy is tightening around the middle class.

and when we talk about voting rights, we have to address the reality of over 2 million african-americans who have been disenfranchised due to criminal convictions. this is not the way to help bring people returning from prison back into their communities. if you can believe it, in some states over 20 percent of the african-american population is disenfranchised. florida — 23 percent. virginia — 20 percent. kentucky — 22 percent. but the percentages don't necessarily give the entire picture because in many, many states with large african american populations, the percentage may be lower but the number of individuals who can't cast a ballot is high. georgia — almost 160,000 people; texas — over 150,000 people; alabama — over 135,000 people; mississippi — over 107,000 people. that is why i am a sponsor of legislation introduced on the house side by rep. john conyers called the democracy restoration act which would restore federal voting rights.

we must remember that the struggle for our rights is not a struggle for one day, or one year, or one generation — it is the struggle of a lifetime, and one that must be fought by every generation.

all of you in this room know it, but it bears saying out loud: civil rights are not just about for voting rights, but economic and social equality — and most importantly, jobs. 50 years later, it remains the great unfinished business of the civil rights movement.

in conclusion, i've been traveling this country for over a year now. people are ready for a new movement — a political revolution — to transform our country economically, politically, socially and environmentally. in other words, we are building a movement of millions of americans who are prepared to stand up and fight back.

i believe the time has come to say loudly and clearly: enough is enough. this great nation and its government belong to all of the people, and not to a handful of billionaires, their super-pacs and their lobbyists.

now is not the time for thinking small. now is not the time for the same-old, same-old establishment politics and stale inside-the-beltway ideas.

now is the time for millions of working families — black and white, latino and native american, gay and straight — to come together, to revitalize american democracy, to end the collapse of the american middle class and to make certain that our children and grandchildren are able to enjoy a quality of life that brings them health, prosperity, security and joy — and that once again makes the united states the leader in the world in the fight for economic and social justice, for environmental sanity and for a world of peace.please let me—i'm senator bernie sanders and let me—let me thank all of you for coming out this afternoon to discuss an issue of enormous consequence and something i think we don't quite focus on as much as we might here in the united states.

and i'm especially pleased that we have a great panel, who will help us discuss the issue. and on the panel will be joe stiglitz, who is a nobel prize-winning economist, chief economist at roosevelt institute and professor of economics at columbia.

we have jacob kirkegaard, who's the senior fellow at the peterson institute for international economics. we have james galbraith, professor of government at the university of texas.

and have stephanie kelton, who will be the moderator, who is the former chair of the economics department at kansas—kansas city university, and is the chief economist for the minority on the budget committee.

we think perhaps we have the ambassador here. ok, and we thank ambassador panagopoulos very much for being here and i'm going to get you up here in a moment.

what we are here today to talk about is the very, very important issue regarding the ongoing debt crisis in greece and the way that people in governments all over the world are struggling with too much debt.

this is—we're going to be focusing on greece, but in truth, this issue goes beyond greece, and countries that are struggling not only with too much debt, too much inequality, and too little growth in income.

today, as i think all of you know, there is a very, very serious economic situation unfolding in greece. in many ways, greece today resembles the united states in the 1930s, in the midst of the worst depression—economic downturn in the history of our country.

the greece economy has basically collapsed and the people of greece are trapped in a very, very deep depression. i want to begin by expressing my solidarity with the people of greece. with five years of cruel and counterproductive austerity policies; policies demanded by the european central bank, the european commission, and the international monetary fund have left the people of greece facing a full-blown humanitarian crisis.

in my view, there is no more obvious example of the failure of austerity policies than what is going on greece. for more than five years, greece has cut pensions, greece has slashed its government workforce, greece has made deep spending cuts that have eviscerated its social safety net.

in other words, despite what we have been led to believe by many in the media, greece has not gone on a shopping spree. it has not overfunded its government. rather, it has imposed massive spending cuts that have caused devastating pain to some of its most vulnerable people.

it has done this because its creditors, led by germany, have insisted that austerity is the only way to dig greece out of its debt. as a result, today, greece has the highest levels of inequality and the worst unemployment rates in europe.

the official unemployment rate is 26 percent, 26 percent. youth unemployment in greece today is more than 50 percent. more than 30 percent of the people in greece are living in poverty. and the greek economy is 25 percent smaller—has shrunk by 25 percent over the last five years.

that is really quite incredible.

instead of solving the problem, austerity, in my view, has made a bad situation much worse. greece has seen its debt-to-gdp ratio shoot up from about 120 percent to about 175 percent today. and now to, quote, unquote, "fix the problem," the troika wants greece to borrow more money and make deeper cuts to wages, pensions, and other social programs.

in january, as you all know, the people of greece stood up and said enough is enough. they elected a new government, known as syriza, that promised to end the harsh austerity policies—that was their campaign pledge; by increasing their minimum wage, by increasing job production, by protecting the most vulnerable against pension cuts, and ensuring that the wealthiest people in greece started paying their fair share of taxes, a very serious problem in that country.

but instead of working with the new government to find a rational path forward, the troika demanded more austerity than ever.

on july 5th, the people of greece spoke, once again, in an overwhelming show of solidarity with their government, 61 percent of the people of greece said no to more austerity for the poor, for the children, for the sick, and for the elderly.

yet, instead of working with the greek government on a sensible plan that would allow greece to improve its economy and pay back its debt, germany and the troika continued to push greece to accept even greater austerity.

they want even deeper pension cuts, an increase in the regressive vat tax from 13 percent to 23 percent, automatic budget cuts as the greek economy underperforms, privatization of state assets, including the electricity grid, deregulation of the transportation, rail, pharmaceutical, and other sectors in the economy, weakening of trade unions.

in other words, the people of greece are being told that their voices, which they cast in two elections, really do not matter, that their misery does not matter, that an entire generation of young people who are unemployed or underemployed does not matter, that the sick and the elderly do not matter, that democracy itself does not matter, and that, to my perspective, is unacceptable.

i believe that this plan is simply unsustainable. in my view, austerity has failed and continuing with austerity means the greek economy will continue to fail its people, unemployment, poverty, and inequality will increase from already obscene levels.

and maybe, just maybe, some people are beginning to wake up to this reality.

in a confidential report that was made public earlier this month, officials from the imf warned that the imf could not take part in any new bailout for greece unless the greek government was offered a substantial debt-relief package as part of any new deal.

in light of this report, it is time for the troika to provide the greek government with the flexibility it needs to create jobs, raise wages, and improve its economy. without a substantial improvement in its economy, greece will never escape its debt crisis.

and let us not forget a little bit about history. let us not forget what happened after world war i, when the allies imposed oppressive austerity on germany—on germany, as part of the versailles treaty.

and i think all of you who know anything about history understand what happened and that i the german economy collapsed, unemployment skyrocketed, people were pushing their money around in wheelbarrows to buy a loaf of bread, and the result of all of that massive discontent was that adolf hitler and the nazi party won an election and took power, and you all know the results of that.

what many people do not know about greece today is that the party that finished third in the greek—recent greek election is called golden dawn. this is a party which some people call a neo-nazi party, but other people believe that it is nothing neo about it. it is a nazi party, which came in third place in the recent election.

in my view, we should learn from history and we should understand that when democracy fails, when people vote for something and cannot get what the government promised because of outside forces, this leads to massive discontent. it leads to contempt for democracy and it opens the path for right-wing extremist parties like golden dawn. finally, let us remember that one of the main reasons why greece was unable to take on so much debt was because it had help from goldman sachs, who helped disguise the nature of the greek debt.

today, when we talk about debt, we should appreciate that something similar is happening right now in puerto rico, where the government there is struggling with unsustainable debt. and a group of hedge fund billionaires are demanding austerity in puerto rico.

they are demanding the firing of teachers, the closing of schools, so that they can reap huge profits off the suffering and misery of the children and the people of puerto rico.

it is time for creditors to sit down with the governments of greece and puerto rico, and work out a debt-repayment plan that is fair to both sides. the people of greece and the children of puerto rico deserve nothing less.

over seven years ago, the major economic leaders of 44 countries gathered in a hotel in bretton woods, new hampshire, to establish international economic and financial rules. as a result of that conference, the international monetary fund and the world bank were established.

i think it is clear to anyone who has taken a look at this situation that the rules regarding our international financial system today are rigged in favor of the wealthy and the powerful, at the expense of everyone else.

today, 85 of the wealthiest people in this world own more wealth than the bottom half of the world's population, over 3 billion people. by next year, oxfam has estimated that the top 1 percent of the world's population will own more wealth than the bottom 99 percent of the world's population.

in my view, we have got to begin—and i hope this forum today is a start in that process; a serious discussion about how we change our international financial rules to expand—expand economic opportunity and reduce income and wealth inequality, not only in greece and in puerto rico, but throughout the world.

the global economy is simply unsustainable when so few have so much and so many have so little.

it is now my pleasure to introduce, to say a few words, and we're delighted that he's with us today, ambassador panagopoulos. ambassador?let me begin by thanking rose ann demoro, and the 185,000 members of national nurses united, for providing high quality healthcare to the american people.

i am honored to have the support of the largest nurse's union in this country!

year after year, i have been proud to work with national nurses united fighting to expand medicare, fighting to address the nursing shortage in this country, and fighting to make sure that nurses at the va and all over this country have the right to collectively bargain for decent wages and benefits, among many other things.

there is no job in this country that is more demanding, more important, and more fulfilling than being a nurse.

you take care of our young children when they get sick. you take care of the elderly in their time of need. you take care of our veterans, many of whom have come home with no arms, no legs, and no eyesight.

and, you give people hope that they will live to see a better day.

last year, when nurses became infected with ebola after treating sick patients, i marched with you in oakland to make sure that every nurse in america has the training, the equipment, and the protective gear that they need to stay healthy. and, we need to make sure that gets done.

we have a nursing shortage in this country that we have got to address. we need to make it a national priority to work together to train more nurses, and that's exactly what i intend to do as your president. we all know that nurses prevent medical errors, reduce health care costs, and help patients recover more quickly. we need to be looking at health outcomes and nurses are the key to making patients healthier.

during the debate over the affordable care act, i was delighted to work with you to substantially increase funding for the national health service corps to provide scholarships and loan repayments for nurses and other health care professionals who work in areas where there is a desperate need for quality healthcare.

as you know, i have spent my career fighting for something that i consider to be a human right. that human right is health care. and let me say loudly and clearly — health care is a right of all people, not a privilege.

the time has come for us to end the international embarrassment of the united states of america, our great country, being the only major country on earth that does not guarantee healthcare to all people as a right. and together — with your help — we are going to end that embarrassment.

all of you here today — nurses who see people at their sickest, at their most vulnerable — understand better than anyone the extent of the tragedy that exists in this country when people have no health insurance.

every single year thousands of our fellow americans die because they don't get the preventive care they need when they should. they wait and wait until the problem can't be ignored any more and they show up in the emergency room — far sicker than they should have ever gotten. sick with an illness that could have been prevented, could have been caught far sooner.

and when the doctor or the nurse say well why didn't you come in when you were first sick, they say well, i didn't have any health insurance. i didn't have any money. or maybe i did have insurance, but my deductible was so high i just couldn't afford to take the money out of pocket.

that should not happen in the united states of america. when you're sick, you should be able to access health care. when you go to the hospital, you should not come out in bankruptcy.

nobody understands that reality more than the national nurses united!

that's why i have been proud to work with all of you to guarantee health care as a right of citizenship to every man, woman, and child in this country. the time has come for the united states to join every other major industrialized country and make sure that we have a health care system that works for all of our people.

the time has come for a medicare for all single payer health care program.

we have got to move towards a healthcare system which is based on providing quality care to all of our people rather than worrying about the profits of the insurance companies.

we have got to move toward a healthcare system which ends the absurdity of americans paying, by far, the highest price for prescription drugs in the world.

and, we have got to require medicare to negotiate with the drug companies to lower the outrageously high prices of prescription drugs.

and, do you know what we are also going to do? we are going to impose a financial transactions tax on wall street speculators in order to make sure that tuition is free in public colleges and universities throughout this country.

one of the major reasons why the middle class is collapsing, 45 million americans are living in poverty, and the gap between the very rich and everyone else is growing wider, is because of the greed, recklessness, and illegal behavior on wall street.

in my view, if we are going to rebuild the middle class, and allow americans to get the education, the healthcare, and the jobs they need, we have got to make sure that wall street pays its fair share in taxes.

not only would a tax on wall street speculation provide us with the revenue that we need to make a college education tuition free, it would also reduce speculation and encourage wall street to invest in the job-creating productive economy.

this is not a radical idea. it was done in this country from 1914-1966. today, it's what 40 countries around the world are doing.

and i am very proud to have worked with you on legislation to do just that!

wall street has got to understand that it can't have it all. if we are going to have the best educated workforce in the world and a vibrant middle class, wall street has got to pay its fair share in taxes.

and with your support, and the support of millions of other americans we can build a political revolution in this country that can make this happen.

it's time to say enough is enough!

we are going to make healthcare a right of all of our people!

we are going to make public colleges and universities tuition free and substantially reduce student loan debt in america!

we are going to make it easier, not harder, for nurses and millions of americans to join unions and collectively bargain for better wages and benefits!

we are going to rebuild the middle class in america!
you know, three and a half months ago, we just began to campaign, and everybody said this campaign was a joke. who believes that the american people are prepared to take on the economic and political establishment of america? and three and a half months have gone by, we have had huge crowds all over america. in iowa, new hampshire, california, oregon, you name it.

and when people ask me why, what i tell them is the american people are saying, "enough is enough." this country belongs to all of us, not just a handful of billionaires. and before i get going, i want to wish a happy birthday to some institution, it is called social security, 80 years old. and let me be very clear, virtually all of the republican candidates, in one form or another, wants to cut social security.

together, we are not going to let them do that. when we have seniors in this country trying to get by at $12, $13,000 per year, disabled people unable to put enough food on the table, no, we are not going to cut social security, we are going to expand social security. and we are going to do that by lifting the cap on taxable income.

in america today, what we are seeing is the disappearance of the great middle class.

we are seeing millions of our brothers and sisters in iowa, vermont, all over this country, working longer hours for lower wages, people are working two, three jobs in order to put food on the table. meanwhile, almost of the new income, all of the new wealth is going to the top one percent. that is going to change. we need an economy that works for working people, not a handful of billionaires.

and let me tell you something about this campaign finance system that we have today. it is a corrupt system. citizens united will go down in history as one of the worst decisions ever made by a supreme court.

and let me repeat a promise that i have made to other crowds. and that is, no nominee of mine through the supreme court will get that position unless he or she pledges to make certain that citizens united is overturned.

and when we try to understand why it is that so many of our family members, our friends, our neighbors, are working in two or three jobs in order to cobble together an income and some health care, the answer is that wages in our country, for many people, are much, too low. and that is why we have got to recognize that a $7.25 minimum wage is a starvation wage, we have got to raise the minimum wage to a living wage, $15 an hour.

what we understand also, is that when we live in a competitive global economy, we need the best educated workforce possible.

it makes no sense to me that we have hundreds of thousands of bright, qualified young people who want to get a higher education, are unable to do so because their family lacks the income. that's wrong. and that is why i have introduced legislation, and will fight for as president of the united states, to make sure that every public college and university in america is tuition free.

and we have also got to deal with the disgrace of outrageously high student debt. there are millions of americans, young, and not so young, who are paying 7, 8, 10 percent on their student debt, 20, 25 percent of their limited income. if you can refinance your home at two or three percent today, you should not be paying eight or ten percent on student debt.

and the government should also not be profiteering on student debt held by working-class families.

and when we talk about raising the minimum wage to a living wage, we have also got to talk about pay equity for women workers.

women cannot continue to earn $.78 on the dollar compared to men workers. many of my republican colleagues talk about family values. their values are that a woman should not have the right to control her own body, i disagree.

their values are that our gay brothers and sisters should not be able to get married, or enjoy all the benefits of american citizenship, i disagree. but my family values -- i have been married 27 years, got four kids, seven grandchildren. my family values are that the united states has to earn -- end the international embarrassment of being the only major country on earth that doesn't guarantee pay, family, and medical leave.

when a woman has a baby in this country, regardless of her income, she should be able to spend three months with that baby, getting to know that baby, love that baby. that's a family value. and when we talk about american values, when we talk about where we want to go as a country, i want to end the absurdity of the united states being the only major country on earth that does not guarantee health care to all people as a right.

and that is why i strongly support a medicare for all single payer programs. and when we talk about our responsibilities as adults, as parents, as citizens of this earth, we have a moral responsibility to make certain that we leave this planet in a way that is habitable for our kids and our grandchildren. the debate is over. climate change is a real, climate change is caused by human activity, climate change is already causing devastating problems in our country and around the world.

what the united states must do -- and i will do as president, is lead the world, working with other countries to transform our energy system. well, there is donald trump, what can we do? i apologize, we left the helicopter at home. it's in the garage, forgot to bring it. but our job is to make sure that we join the rest of the world, major countries around the world, in guaranteeing health care to every man, woman, and child as a right of citizenship.

it makes no sense to me that, despite the gains of the affordable care act, we continue to have 35 million people uninsured, and many of you are underinsured, right? high deductibles, high co-payments, and yet, after all of that, we end up spending almost twice as much per capita on health care as do the people of any other country. that is wrong, that has got to change.

let me close on one issue that i know a lot of people are thinking about. the truth is, that in america we have made real progress in terms of fighting racism over the years. and i want to thank the people of iowa for their courage in voting for obama in 2008.

and what you showed is that a state which is mostly white could go beyond the color of a candidate's skin and vote for somebody based on their character and their ideas. thank you, iowa.

but anyone who reads the papers, anyone who looks at tv, understands that we still have a long way to go. anyone who as seen the tapes of sandra bland or samuel dubose understand that it is unacceptable that african-americans can get taken out of their cars, thrown to the ground, assaulted, and thrown into jail and die three days later. that is not what this country is supposed to be about.

so you are looking at a candidate who, if elected president, will do everything that he can to end the stain of racism and institutional racism in this country, and bring about major criminal justice reforms.

i was a mayor for eight years, and i've worked with our police department, and the truth is, most cops have are good, very difficult job, they do the right thing.

it's a very hard job. but when a police officer, or any other public official, breaks the law, that officer must be held accountable. today in america, we have more people in jail than any other country on earth, including china. we have a disproportionate number of people in jail who are black or hispanic. so we have got a lot of work to do in criminal justice.

number one, i will end this absurdity of having private corporations making billions out of jails.

we are going to end this minimum sentencing by which too many people have criminal records. and when people go to jail, i want to make sure that there is a pathway for them out of jail. if people leave jail without money, without jobs, without education, without housing, without mental health issues being dealt with, the likelihood is they're going to end up back in jail, and that is pretty crazy. so what i want to see, is i want to see us invest heavily in jobs and education, not jail and incarceration.

now, let me just conclude by telling you one thing that no other candidate will tell you, and that is i need your help, obviously, to win here in iowa, and i appreciate the support of so many people. but if we are going to transform america, if we are going to have a government that represents working families and not large campaign donors, we need a political revolution in this country.

we need millions of people to stand up and make it clear to the billionaire class they cannot have it all. they are going to start paying their fair share of taxes. they are not going to continue to ship out jobs to china and elsewhere. but to make all of that happen, we need a strong grassroots political movement from vermont to california, and significantly here in iowa.

so i welcome and urge all of you to join me in helping to make a political revolution, which transforms america, which creates a government that works for all of us, and not just a handful.

thank you all very much. brothers and sisters, thank you for inviting me to be with you today, and i want to thank all of the 12.5 million members of the afl-cio for working hard each and every day to improve the lives of all of the american people.

during my 24 years in congress, i have been proud to stand side by side with the afl-cio fighting to increase the minimum wage; fighting to guarantee health care to every man, woman and child as a right of citizenship; fighting to make it easier for workers to join unions; fighting to create millions of jobs rebuilding our crumbling infrastructure; fighting for pay equity for women workers; fighting for paid family and medical leave; fighting to expand, not cut social security; and fighting against disastrous trade agreements like nafta, cafta, and permanent normal trade relations with china that have destroyed millions of decent-paying jobs in america.

since the formation of our nation over 230 years ago, the trade union movement has always led the fight to improve the quality of life for all americans, and that is what the afl-cio is all about.

when only the wealthy were allowed to vote, the trade union movement was successful in demanding universal suffrage and a more democratic society. when tiny children were forced to work in the factories and fields, it was the trade union movement who put an end to abusive child labor and who fought for quality public education. when bosses refused to negotiate with their workers and fired them for standing up for their rights, the trade union movement pushed congress into passing legislation which guaranteed all people the right to organize unions and collectively bargain for better wages and benefits.

the list goes on. social security, the minimum wage, medicare and medicaid, affordable housing — are just a few of the benefits that workers have won over the years thanks in large part to the trade union movement.

none of those historic accomplishments would have been achieved without the work of the trade union movement. but today, all of those accomplishments are under attack by some of the wealthiest people and largest corporations in this country.

brothers and sisters, the fact of the matter is that there is a war going on in this country today. and, i'm not talking about the misguided and unnecessary war we waged in iraq.

i'm not talking about the war so many of my republican colleagues seem hell bent to wage with iran.

i'm talking about the 40-year war against the american middle class, the american standard of living, and the american dream of owning a home, sending kids to college, and having a secure retirement.

what business leaders are telling us today is that if workers don't accept massive cuts in salary with no benefits, they'll move to china. they'll move to mexico. and, the american worker can join the increasing ranks of the poor. in other words, what they are saying is to hell with the american middle class; to hell with the american dream. ceos are rewarding themselves with outrageous compensation packages while they are squeezing everything they can out of the american worker. that is the war that is being waged against the middle class and that is what we have got to fight against!

brothers and sisters, you understand why the american people are angry because you have witnessed the decline of the middle class with your own eyes. you have seen companies receiving tax breaks for shutting down factories in this country and moving overseas. you have seen ceos earn 300 times what their average workers make. you have seen workers fired for standing up for their rights to collectively bargain. you have seen the transformation of our country away from a general motors economy of good wages and good benefits to a walmart economy of starvation wages and no benefits. and, you are saying very loudly and very clearly that enough is enough!

there is something profoundly wrong when the united states of america has more wealth and income inequality since 1928. there is something profoundly wrong when almost all of the new income gains generated since the wall street crash is flowing to the top one percent.

there is something profoundly wrong when the top one-tenth of one percent owns almost as much wealth as the bottom 90 percent.

you understand better than anyone else that the real unemployment is not 5.3%. if you include people who have given up looking for work and people who are working part-time when they want to work full-time the real unemployment rate is 10.4 percent.

and, here is something that is almost never discussed in the mainstream media. youth unemployment is off the charts.

today, the average real unemployment rate of young high school graduates is 33.8 percent for white americans, 36.1 percent for hispanic americans, and 51.3 percent for african-americans.

it is a national disgrace that real median family income has gone down by nearly $5,000 since 1999 and is lower today than it was 26 years ago.

it is unacceptable that the typical male worker made $783 less last year than he did 42 years ago.

it is unacceptable that the typical female worker made $1,337 less last year than she did in 2007.

it is an international embarrassment that nearly 20 percent of kids in america are living in poverty and we have the highest childhood poverty rate of any major developed country on earth.

today, over half of american workers have less than $10,000 in savings and have no idea how they will be able to retire with any shred of dignity.

meanwhile, while the middle class is disappearing and 45 million americans are living in poverty, the wealthiest people in this country are doing phenomenally well and have never had it so good.

over the last two years, the wealthiest 15 people in this country — including bill gates, warren buffet, the owners of walmart, the koch brothers, and sheldon adelson — have seen an increase in their wealth of $170 billion.

today, one family, the walton family of walmart owns more wealth than the bottom 130 million americans!

that is the economic reality of today, and that is what we are fighting against.

brothers and sisters, fighting for the rights of working people is not just another issue for me. it's what i am all about.

in my view, the trade union movement is the last line of defense against the billionaire class and the moneyed interests who are out to destroy virtually every major piece of legislation passed in the last 80 years to protect the working people of this country.

let's be clear about what we are up against.

today, as a result of the disastrous citizens united supreme court decision, the koch brothers, the second wealthiest family in america, is prepared to spend some $900 million this election cycle — more than either the republican party or the democratic party is likely to spend.

why? what do the koch brothers want? let me tell you.

the koch brothers and their billionaire allies don't just want to cut social security, they want to eliminate social security; they don't want to just cut medicare, they want to eliminate medicare; they don't just want to cut healthcare at the va, they want to eliminate the veterans administration; they don't want to just cut the postal service, they want to eliminate it; they're not only opposed to increasing the minimum wage, they don't believe in the concept of the minimum wage; they don't want to just cut the estate tax, they want to abolish it.

in other words, the koch brothers and the billionaire class want it all. they want to give americans the "freedom" to live in poverty working for $3 or $4 an hour without healthcare, without childcare, without a pension, without the ability to send their kids to college, and without any hope that their children will have a higher standard of living than they do.

and they understand that the major obstacle standing in the way of their extreme, right wing agenda is the trade union movement.

that's why they have fought so hard to eliminate unions in wisconsin, indiana, ohio, michigan, and all over this country by ending collective bargaining rights.

and, that's why i believe that we need to create a political revolution in this country of millions of workers, veterans, the elderly, the disabled, people of color standing together and telling the billionaire class that enough is enough! your greed is destroying this country. you cannot have it all! you cannot continue to get tax breaks while children in this country are going hungry.

this country belongs to all of us, not just to a handful of millionaires and billionaires.

in my view, the american people are sick and tired of establishment politicians and the establishment media telling them that they need to be realistic; that they have got to lower their expectations; that we cannot afford to expand social security; that we cannot raise the minimum wage to $15 an hour; that we cannot pass a major jobs program to put millions of americans to work; that we cannot guarantee healthcare to all americans; that it is just too impossible to end institutional racism in this country; and that the only option in the general election must be between two candidates who will support a continuation of disastrous trade policies that are destroying the middle class in this country.

in my view, we have got to send a very loud and a very clear message to the establishment: you are wrong, you are dead wrong!

on every one of these issues, the american people are on our side. maybe, just maybe, it's time that the american people truly had a candidate who will stand up for their interests, not just for ceos and billionaires on wall street. and, that's why i am running for president of the united states of america.

brothers and sisters, in my view, every candidate running for president has got to answer the following questions:

why is it that, despite all of the incredible gains we have made in productivity and all of the advancements that we have been made in technology, millions of americans are working longer hours for lower wages while a handful of billionaires do unbelievably well?

why does it happen that most of the new jobs being created today in america are part-time, low wage jobs?

how did it happen that since 2001, over 60,000 factories have shut down in america and millions of good-paying manufacturing jobs have disappeared?

how does it happen that new manufacturing jobs created in this country pay in some cases half of what manufacturing jobs used to pay?

why are we in a race to the bottom with low wage countries like china, mexico, and india?

in my view, there are two fundamental reasons for this.

the first has to do with our disastrous unfettered free trade policy — which literally tells corporate america — throw american workers out on the street, move to china, move to mexico, move to vietnam where you can pay workers pennies an hour; where you don't have to worry about the environment; where you don't need to worry about the health and safety of workers; where you don't need to have one iota of respect for human rights.

during my tenure in congress i am proud to tell you that i have voted against and helped lead the opposition to every major free trade agreement that has been passed in recent years.

and, let me be clear in telling you that i will continue to lead the opposition against the trans-pacific partnership, the largest trade agreement in the history of our country.

brothers and sisters, the reality is that nafta has failed, cafta has failed, our membership in the world trade organization has failed, and perhaps, above all, permanent normal trade relations with china has failed.

in my view, the time is now, and it is long overdue, for the united states congress to stand up to corporate america, to stand up to the president of the united states, to stand up to the editorial writers all over this country who year after year after year have told us how wonderful unfettered free trade is, how many new jobs would be created.

the results are in. they are wrong. unfettered free trade has been a disaster for working americans. it has been a disaster for the middle class. and, it is high time we understood that. it is high time we ended our disastrous trade policies and began to negotiate trade policies that work not just for corporate america, not just for ceos who make huge compensation packages, but trade policies that are fair for the working people of this country. and, that's exactly what i intend to do as president.

the second fundamental reason for the decline in the middle class is that the rights of workers to join together and bargain for better wages, benefits, and working conditions have been severely undermined.

today, if an employee is engaged in a union organizing campaign, that employee has a one in five chance of getting fired.

today, half of all employers threaten to close or re-locate their business if workers elect to form a union.

today, when workers become interested in forming a union, 92 percent of private-sector employers force employees to attend closed-door meetings to hear anti-union propaganda; 80 percent require supervisors to attend training sessions on how to attack unions; 78 percent require that supervisors deliver anti-union messages to workers they oversee; and 75% hire outside consultants to run anti-union campaigns.

according to human rights watch: "freedom of association is a right under severe, often buckling pressure when workers in the united states try to exercise it."

that is unacceptable!

and, even when workers are faced with all of these enormous obstacles — even when these workers win union elections, more than one-third of the victories do not result in a first contract for workers.

today, corporate executives are routinely negotiating obscenely high compensation packages for themselves, but they continue to deny their own employees the ability to bargain for a better life. that is wrong.

it is time to turn this around.

it is time to make the employee free choice act the law of the land!

if a majority of workers in a bargaining unit sign valid authorization cards stating that they want a union as their bargaining representative, they must have the right to a union. period!

one of the very first bills that i introduced when i was elected to congress in 1991 was a card check bill.

and, i will tell you that if i am elected president, making it easier for workers to form a union will be one of the very first things that i do in the white house.

today, tens of millions of workers would join a union right now if they had the chance. yet, only 11 percent of the workforce has a union. that is unacceptable and that has got to change!

brothers and sisters, if we are serious about strengthening america's middle class, we have got to restore workers' rights to bargain for better wages, benefits, and safer working conditions.

why do we need to do that?

because we know that union workers earn 30 percent more money, on average, than non-union workers. if you want to make more money to support your family, you need a union!

we know that 79 percent of union workers have a defined benefit pension plan that guarantees income in retirement, while only 16 percent of non-union workers do. if you want to have a secure retirement, you need a union!

we know that 83 percent of union workers have paid sick leave, while only 62 percent of non-union workers do. if you want to make sure that you can take time off from work when you or your child is sick, you need a union! and, if i am elected as the next president, that's exactly what i will fight to do.

and, that's not all.

we have got to acknowledge that millions of americans are now working for totally inadequate wages. the current federal minimum wage of $7.25 an hour is a starvation wage and must be raised. the minimum wage must become a living wage — which means raising it to $15 an hour over the next few years.

the benchmark of full time work in america should be simple and concrete — that no full-time worker should live in poverty.

and a living wage should not only be fair, it should be equitable. that is why we must establish pay equity for women workers by law. it's unconscionable that women earn 78 cents on the dollar compared to men.

further, the united states must end the international embarrassment of being the only major country on earth, the only one, which does not guarantee workers paid medical and family leave, paid sick time and paid vacation time. last place is no place for america.

that is why i will fight for 12 weeks of paid family leave, at least 10 days of paid vacation time and seven days of paid sick time.

my republican colleagues talk a lot about "family values." well, let me be very clear. it is not a family value to force the mother of a newborn baby to go back to work a few days after she gives birth, because she doesn't have the money to stay home and bond with her baby. that is not a family value. that is an insult to everything that i know about what family is about.

today, as a result of the collapse of our middle class and declining wages, the american people are working longer hours than the people of any other country — 54 hours a year more than japanese workers, 119 more hours per year than british workers, 299 hours more than french workers, and 425 hours more than german workers.

over 100 ago, workers in this country marched in protest for a 40 hour work week. well, one hundred years later we still have not achieved that. incredibly, today, 85% of working men and 66% of working women work more than 40 hours a week. and do you know what? many workers in this country get no or very little paid vacation time. that has got to end.

jobs, jobs, jobs

if we are serious about reversing the decline of the middle class we need a major federal jobs program that puts millions of americans back to work at decent paying jobs. at a time when our roads, bridges, water systems, rail and airports are decaying, the most effective way to rapidly create meaningful jobs is to rebuild our crumbling infrastructure. that's why i've introduced legislation that would invest $1 trillion over 5 years to modernize our country's physical infrastructure. this legislation would create and maintain at least 13 million good-paying jobs, while making our country more productive, efficient and safe. and i commit to you that as president, i will lead that legislation into law.

reforming wall street

it is time to break up the largest financial institutions in the country. wall street cannot continue to be an island unto itself, gambling trillions in risky financial instruments while expecting the public to bail it out. we need a banking system that is part of creating a productive economy, not a handful of huge banks on wall street that engage in reckless and illegal activities. if a bank is too big to fail it is too big to exist.

citizens united and campaign finance reform

let me be as blunt as i can while telling you what you already know. as a result of the disastrous supreme court decision in the citizens united case, the american political system has been totally corrupted, and the foundations of american democracy are being undermined. what the supreme court essentially said was that it was not good enough for the billionaire class to own much of our economy. they could now own the u.s. government as well. and that is precisely what they are trying to do.

if we are serious about creating jobs, about climate change and the needs of our children, our veterans and the elderly, we must be deadly serious about campaign finance reform. that is why i will not nominate any justice to the supreme court who has not made it clear that he or she will move to overturn that disastrous decision which is undermining our democracy. long term, we need to go further and establish public funding of elections, so that the dark money of american politics is stopped before democracy is bought and paid for by a handful of billionaires and corporations.

american democracy is not about corporations and billionaires being able to buy candidates and elections. it is not about wall street and big oil or the koch brothers and sheldon adelson spending billions of dollars to elect candidates who will make the rich richer and everyone else poorer.

this is not democracy. this is oligarchy. the defining principle of american democracy is one person, one vote — with every citizen having an equal say — and no voter suppression. and that's the kind of american political system we have to fight for.

college for all

and when we talk about education, let me be very clear. in a highly competitive global economy, we need the best-educated workforce we can create. it is insane and counter-productive to the best interests of our country and its future, that hundreds of thousands of bright young people can not afford to go to college, and that millions of others leave school with a mountain of debt that burdens them for decades. that shortsighted path to the future must end. as president, i will fight to make tuition in public colleges and universities free, as well as substantially lower interest rates on student loans. every person, young and old in america should be given the tools to realize their full god given potential.

health care for all

the united states remains the only major country on earth that does not guarantee health care for all as a right. despite the gains of the affordable care act, 35 million americans continue to lack health insurance and many more are under-insured. yet, we continue paying far more per capita for health care than any other nation. the united states must join the rest of the industrialized world and guarantee health care to all as a right by moving toward a medicare-for-all single-payer system.

protecting our most vulnerable

at a time when millions of americans are struggling to keep their heads above water economically, at a time when senior poverty is increasing, at a time when millions of kids are living in dire poverty my republican colleagues are trying to make a terrible situation even worse. if you can believe it, the republican budget throws 27 million americans off health insurance, makes drastic cuts in medicare, throws millions of low income americans, including pregnant women off nutrition programs, and makes it harder for working-class families to afford college or put their kids into head start. and then, to add insult to injury, they provide huge tax breaks for the very, very wealthiest families in this country while they raise taxes on working families.

well, let me tell my republican colleagues that i respectfully disagree with their approach. instead of cutting social security, we need to expand social security benefits. instead of cutting head start and childcare, we need to move to a universal pre-k system for all the children of this country. as franklin delano roosevelt reminded us: "the test of our progress is not whether we add more to the abundance of those who have much, it is whether we provide enough for those who have little." and that is a test that we as a nation must once again meet and master.

racial justice and economic opportunity

the struggle for equality continues today in america, and the front line of that struggle is the inner cities throughout our nation. from ferguson to baltimore and across the nation, too many african americans and other minorities find themselves subjected to a system that treats citizens who have not committed crimes like criminals.

if current trends continue, 1 in 4 black males born today can expect to spend time in prison during their lifetime. this is an unspeakable tragedy. but this crisis of over incarceration is not just a destruction of human life. it is also costly to the taxpayers who pay almost $70 billion a year for prisons. it makes a lot more sense to me to be investing in jobs and education rather than in jails and incarceration. this issue is a crisis in american society. it is an international disgrace. that is why i have introduced legislation to spend $5.5 billion dollars to fund job-training programs for inner city youth. as a former mayor i understand the importance of police community relations, and the need today across america to improve the climate and dialogue in those relations. instead of building more and more prisons, we need to be building more and more meaningful lives where young people can have a future, not be stuck in a dead end with no hope or opportunity.

immigration reform

today millions of decent, hardworking people live in america with no hope of gaining the status to live and work here legally. many were brought here in their youth, and other came to find a life free of fear, oppression, war or deprivation. we need a rational immigration process, not the republican alternatives of self- deportation or some other draconian non-solution. i believe in a path to citizenship, and i agree with president obama's plans to do through executive action what the congress reuses to do through legislation. we need to solve problems like immigration in american, not use these issues to promote division and hostility.

closing:

brothers and sisters, i believe we can restore the promise of america to every person who wants to work hard to build a future for themselves and their family.

we can live in a country:

where every citizen has health care as a right, not a privilege;

where every parent can have quality and affordable childcare and where all of our qualified young people, regardless of income, can go to college;

where every senior can live in dignity and security, and not be forced to choose between their medicine and their food;

where every veteran who defends this nation gets the quality health care and benefits they have earned and receives the respect they deserve;

where the inner cities of our nation become safer, and where people who want to succeed are treated fairly and given a helping hand;

where every person who dreams of becoming a citizen has a rationale path forward, not just a dark corner to hide in;

where everyone, no matter their race, their religion, their disability or their sexual orientation realizes the full promise of equality that is our birthright as americans.

that is the nation we can build together, and i look forward to working with all of you to build a future that works for all of us, and not just the few on top.
thank you for inviting me to be with you today, and thank you for the hard work that all of you do every day in trying to make our country a better place in which to live and raise a family.

i understand that there are republicans who proclaim how much they love america, but how much they hate the people who work in our government or who participate in the political process. i disagree. in my view, participating in the political process and strengthening democracy — as you do — is one of the most patriotic things we can do as american citizens, and i thank you all for your efforts.

i only have a few minutes, so let me jump to the points i want to make:

when i announced my candidacy less than four months ago, i think that it's fair to say that few took our campaign seriously. but a lot has changed in these last few months.

all across the country we have drawn some the largest crowds of this campaign, including many young people who have not previously been involved in the political process.

hundreds of thousands of people have signed on with our campaign as volunteers and are already hitting the streets and phones.

we have, i believe, received more individual campaign contributions than any other presidential campaign, some 400,000. and in this day of super-pacs and huge campaign contributions i am proud to tell you that our average contribution is $31.20.

most importantly, few would deny that the issues i am running on are generating a great deal of energy and enthusiasm in our grassroots campaign, a campaign that is calling for a political revolution.

the republicans did not win the mid-term election in november. the democrats lost that election because voter turnout was abysmally low, and millions of working people, minorities and young people gave up on "politics as usual" and stayed home.

let me be very clear. in my view, democrats will not retain the white house, will not regain the senate, will not gain the house and will not be successful in dozens of governor's races unless we run a campaign which generates excitement and momentum and which produces a huge voter turnout.

with all due respect, and i do not mean to insult anyone here, that will not happen with politics as usual. the same old, same old will not be successful.

the people of our country understand that — given the collapse of the american middle class and the grotesque level of income and wealth inequality we are experiencing — we do not need more establishment politics or establishment economics.

we need a political movement which is prepared to take on the billionaire class and create a government which represents all americans, and not just corporate america and wealthy campaign donors.

in other words, we need a movement which takes on the economic and political establishment, not one which is part of it.

we need a movement which tells corporate america and the wealthy that you will start paying your fair share of taxes.

we need a movement which tells wall street that when a bank is too big to fail, it is too big to exist. that we will reinstate glass-steagall and break up those huge banks which have a stranglehold over our economy. that we will create a financial system which provides affordable loans to small and medium size businesses, not maintain a financial system which is an island unto itself — designed to make huge profits for the few.

we need a movement which will work with the trade union movement to end our disastrous trade policies, and that includes defeating the disastrous tpp.

we need a movement which says that every worker in america deserves a living wage, and that we will raise the minimum wage to $15 an hour over the next few years; that we will provide pay equity to women workers and that we will end the international disgrace of being the only major country on earth that does not provide at least 12 weeks of family and medical leave, not to mention paid sick time and vacation time.

we need a movement which says that, when real unemployment is over 10 percent and youth unemployment is off the charts, we need to create millions of decent paying jobs by rebuilding our crumbling infrastructure.

we need a movement which tells the koch brothers and the billionaire class that they will not be able to continue buying candidates and elections and that we will overturn this disastrous citizen's united supreme court decision and move toward public funding of elections.

we need a movement which understands that climate change is real, is caused by human activity and that we need to lead the world in transforming our energy system away from fossil fuels and into energy efficiency and sustainable energy. and that includes defeating the keystone pipe line.

we need a movement that says, in a highly competitive global economy, that all of our people who have the ability, the qualifications and the desire, will be able to get a college education regardless of the income of their families because we will make public colleges and universities tuition free — and we're going to pay for it through a tax on wall street speculation.

we need a movement which, once and for all, will end institutional racism in our country and reform a very, very broken criminal justice system. we must not continue being the country in the world with more people in jail than any other — disproportionately people of color. we must become the country in the world which invests in jobs and education, not in jails and incarceration.

and when we talk about bringing our country together, we cannot forget that there are 11 million people here who are undocumented. we must provide legal protections for them, we must pass comprehensive immigration reform and we must provide a path towards citizenship. and we must be clear that the racist and un-american idea that we are going to round up millions of people in the dead of night is unacceptable in this great country of ours.

you are looking at a former congressman who did not believe george w. bush, dick cheney and don rumsfeld and who voted against the war in iraq, one of the worst foreign policy blunders in modern american history. and you are looking at a senator who will stand with president obama in preventing iran from getting a nuclear bomb, but will do it in a way that prevents another war.

let me conclude by saying this: we will win in 2016, not just the white house, the u.s. senate and u.s. house, but statehouses all across the country because we are going to create an unprecedented grassroots movement which taps into the american people's desire for real change in this country.
thank you very much for inviting me to be with you today.

you know, and i know, that the views that many of you here at liberty university hold are very different than mine — whether those issues relate to women's rights, gay rights and other issues. that's no secret.

i came here today because i believe that it is important for those with different views in our country to engage in civil discourse — not just to shout at each other or make fun of each other. it is very easy for those in politics to talk to those who agree with us — and i do that every day. it is harder, but not less important, to try and communicate with those who do not agree with us and see where, if possible, we can find common ground. in other words, to reach out of our zone of comfort.

liberty university is a religious school. it is a school which tries to understand the meaning of morality and the words of the bible, within the context of a very complicated modern world. it is a school which tries to teach its students how to behave with decency and honesty and how to best relate to their fellow human beings. i applaud those goals.

so let me take a few moments to tell you what motivates me in the work that i do as a public servant and as an elected official. i am far, far from perfect human being but i am motivated by a vision which exists in all of the great religions —christianity, judaism, islam, buddhism and others — and which is so beautifully and clearly stated in matthew 7:12. "so in everything, do to others what you would have them to do to you, for this sums up the law and the prophets." the golden rule. do to others what you would have them do to you. not very complicated.

let me be very frank. i understand that issues such as abortion and gay marriage are very important to you, and that we disagree on those issues. i get that. but let me respectfully suggest that there are other issues out there that are of enormous consequence to our country and the world and that maybe, just maybe, we don't disagree on them. and maybe, just maybe, we can work together in trying to resolve them.

amos 5:24; "but let justice roll on like a river, righteousness like a never-failing stream!"

justice. treating others the way we would like to be treated. treating all people with dignity and respect.

it would, i think, be hard for anyone in this room to make the case that the united states today is a "just" society or anything resembling a just society.

in america today there is massive injustice in terms of income and wealth inequality. injustice is rampant. we live in the wealthiest country in the history of the world but most americans don't know that because almost all of that wealth and income is going to the top 1 percent. we are living at a time where a handful of people have wealth beyond comprehension — huge yachts, jet planes, tens of billions of dollars, more money that they could spend in a thousand life-times, while, at the same time, millions of people are struggling to feed their families or put a roof over their heads or find the money to go to a doctor.

when we talk about morality and when we talk about justice we have to understand that there is no justice when the top one-tenth of 1 percent own almost as much wealth as the bottom 90 percent. there is no justice when all over this country people are working long hours for abysmally low wages, $7.25 an hour, $8 an hour, while 58 percent of all new income being created today goes to the top 1 percent.

there is no justice when, in recent years, we have seen a proliferation of millionaires and billionaires while, at the same time, the united states has the highest rate of childhood poverty in the industrialized world. how can we talk about morality when we turn our backs on the children of this country? twenty percent of the children in this country live in poverty and that includes 40 percent of african-american children. there is no justice when, in the wealthiest country in the history of the world, children in our country go to bed hungry.

there is no justice when the 15 wealthiest people in this country in the last two years saw their wealth increase by $170 billion dollars. that is more wealth, acquired in a two-year period, than is owned by the bottom 130 million americans. and while the very rich become much richer, millions of families have no savings at all and struggle every week just to stay alive economically, and the elderly and disabled wonder how they stay warm in the winter. that is not justice. that is a rigged economy designed by the wealthiest people in this country to benefit the wealthiest people in this country at the expense of everyone else.

there is no justice when thousands of people in america die each year because they don't have health insurance and don't get to a doctor when they should, or when elderly people are forced to choose between food or medicine because our citizens pay the highest prices in the world for prescription drugs. that is not justice. that is not morality. that is simply an indication that we are the only major country on earth which does not guarantee health care for all as a right.

there is no justice when low-income and working-class mothers are forced to separate from their babies one or two weeks after birth and go back to work because we are the only major country on earth which does not have a paid family and medical leave policy. that is not justice. that is an attack on family values that everyone in this room should be appalled at.

there is no justice in our country when youth unemployment exists at tragic levels — with 51 percent of african american high school kids unemployed or underemployed. no. we apparently do not have the funds to provide jobs or educational opportunities for our young people but we sure do have the money to throw them into jails. today, the united states has more people in jail than any other country on earth, and many are serving time in inhumane conditions. that is not justice. that is the destruction of human life.

i am not a theologian or an expert on the bible or a catholic. i am just a u.s. senator from the small state of vermont. but i agree with pope francis when he says; "the current financial crisis… originated in a profound human crisis: the denial of the primacy of the human person! we have created new idols. the worship of the ancient golden calf has returned in a new and ruthless guise in the idolatry of money and the dictatorship of an impersonal economy lacking a truly human purpose."

he also states; "there is a need for financial reform along ethical lines that would produce in its turn an economic reform to benefit everyone. money has to serve, not to rule."

in his view, and i agree with him, we are living in a nation and in a world which worships the acquisition of money and great wealth, but which turns its back on those in need. and that must end. we need to move toward an economy which works for all, and not just the few.

throughout human history there has been endless discussion and debate about the meaning of justice and the meaning of morality. and i know that here at liberty university that discussion and debate will continue.

i would hope very much that as part of that discussion and part of that learning process some of you will conclude that if we strive toward morality and toward justice, it is imperative that we have the courage to stand with the poor and working people of our country. new hampshire plays a unique role in the american political process, and i want to thank all of you for inviting me to be with you today. your hard work not only makes new hampshire a better place in which to live and work, but impacts all of america.

when i announced my candidacy 4 1/2 months ago, i think that it's fair to say that few people took our campaign seriously. but a lot has changed in these last few months.

all across the country we have drawn some of the largest turnouts of this campaign, and what i am particularly excited about is that many of those getting involved are young people who have not previously been involved in the political process.

hundreds of thousands of people have signed on with our campaign as volunteers and, as we speak, our volunteers are knocking on doors across the country, are on the phone and are actively engaged in social media for the campaign.

we have, i believe, received more individual campaign contributions than any other presidential campaign, well over 400,000. and in this day of super-pacs and huge campaign contributions i am proud to tell you that our average contribution is somewhere around $31.20. i do not represent the corporate agenda or the billionaire class — and i do not want their money and i do not and will not have a super-pac. this is a people's campaign and we will win or lose based on the support we get from working people and the middle class.

i come from a family which did not have a lot of money. my dad came here from poland at the age of 17 without a nickel in his pocket and we grew up without money in a 3 1/2 room rent controlled apartment in brooklyn, ny. some of you may recall an old union song which asks: "which side are you on?" well, i know which side i am on. i am a proud progressive, prepared to stand with the working families of this country; prepared to take on powerful special interests which wield enormous power over the economic and political life of this country. that is what i did yesterday, that is what i do today and that is what i will do if elected president of the united states.

now, let me suggest something that some of you will agree with and some of you may not. in my view, the republicans did not win the mid-term election last november. we lost that election because voter-turnout was abysmally low, and millions of working people, minorities and young people gave up on "politics as usual" and stayed home.

let me be very clear. in my view, democrats will not retain the white house, will not regain the senate, will not gain the house and will not be successful in dozens of governor's races unless we run a campaign which generates excitement and momentum and which produces a large voter turnout. democrats win when the turnout is high. republicans win when the turnout is low.

and how do we do that? how do we generate the excitement on the ground, how do we get those who are disillusioned back into the political process, how do we get young people involved, how do we get working class republicans to stop voting against heir own best interests? with all due respect, that will not happen with politics as usual. the same old, same old will likely not be successful.

the people of our country understand that we are much better off economically today than we were 7 years ago when president bush left office and we were hemorrhaging 800,000 jobs a month and the world's financial system was on the verge of collapse.

but they also understand that for the last 40 years the great middle class of this country has been disappearing and all over nh and vt and across the country millions of people are working 2 or 3 jobs to cobble together enough income and health care to sustain their families and we have more people living in poverty than almost any time in our history.

and they understand that while the very, very rich get richer, that while there has been a massive transfer of wealth from working families to the top one-tenth of of one percent, and while we have more income and wealth inequality now than at any time since 1928, we do not need more establishment politics or establishment economics.

the american people are catching on that we need a political movement which is prepared to take on the billionaire class and create a government which represents all americans, and not just the people on top and wealthy campaign donors.

in other words, we need a movement which takes on the economic and political establishment, not one which is part of it.

we need a movement which tells corporate america and the wealthy that they will start paying their fair share of taxes. no. multi- national corporations are not going to continue stashing their billions in profits in the cayman islands and other tax havens and, in a given year, pay not a nickel in federal taxes — while children in this america go hungry. no. the ceos of large corporations are not going to continue getting huge compensation packages and incredible pensions, while they cuts the wages, health care and pensions of their workers. no. we're not going to continue disastrous trade policies which have cost us millions of decent paying jobs as companies shut down here and move to china and other low wage countries.

corporate greed is destroying this country and, whether they like it or not, that. greed and destructiveness is going to end.

we need a movement which tells wall street that when a bank is too big to fail, it is too big to exist. that we will reinstate glass-steagall and break up those huge banks which have a stranglehold over our economy. that we will create a financial system which provides affordable loans to small and medium size businesses, not maintain a financial system which is an island unto itself — designed to make huge profits for the few.

we need a movement which will work with the trade union movement to end our disastrous trade policies, and that includes defeating the disastrous tpp.

we need a movement which says that every worker in america deserves a living wage, and that we will raise the minimum wage to $15 an hour over the next few years; that we will provide pay equity to women workers and that we will end the international disgrace of being the only major country on earth that does not provide at least 12 weeks of family and medical leave, not to mention paid sick time and vacation time.

we need a movement which says that, when real unemployment is over 10 percent and youth unemployment is off the charts, we need to create millions of decent paying jobs by rebuilding our crumbling infrastructure.

we need a movement which tells the koch brothers and the billionaire class that they will not be able to continue buying candidates and elections and that we will overturn this disastrous citizen's united supreme court decision and move toward public funding of elections. and we will not allow republican governors and legislatures to get away with voter suppression

we need a movement which understands that climate change is real, is caused by human activity and that we need to lead the world in transforming our energy system away from fossil fuels and into energy efficiency and sustainable energy. and that includes defeating the keystone pipe line line.

we need a movement that says, in a highly competitive global economy, that all of our people who have the ability, the qualifications and the desire, will be able to get a college education regardless of the income of their families because we will make public colleges and universities tuition free — and we're going to pay for it through a tax on wall street speculation.

we need a movement which, once and for all, will end institutional racism in our country and reform a very, very broken criminal justice system. we must not continue being the country in the world with more people in jail than any other — disproportionately people of color. we must become the country in the world which invests in jobs and education, not in jails and incarceration.

and when we talk about bringing our country together, we cannot forget that there are 11 million people here who are undocumented. we must provide legal protections for them, we must pass comprehensive immigration reform and we must provide a path towards citizenship. and we must be clear that the racist and unamerican idea that we are going to round up millions of people in the dead of night is unacceptable in this great country of ours.

you are looking at a former congressman who did not believe george w. bush, dick cheney and don rumsfeld and who voted against the war in iraq, one of the worst foreign policy blunders in modern american history. and you are looking at a senator who will stand with president obama in preventing iran from getting a nuclear, but will do it in a way that prevents another war.

let me conclude by saying this: we will win in 2016, not just the white house, the u.s. senate and u.s. house, but state houses all across the country because we are going to create an unprecedented grass-roots movement which taps into the american people's desire for real change in this country.
iowa, thank you.

thanks to all of you here tonight for your patriotism, for your love of country and for doing what too few americans today are doing.

you are not standing on the sidelines complaining. you are not turning your backs on the political process.

you are standing up and fighting back. that's what you are doing. and that's what my campaign is about.

when you see the middle class of this country disappearing, and people working two or three jobs so their families can survive, you don't shrug your shoulders. you fight to raise the minimum wage and pay equity for women workers. you fight for a massive federal jobs program to rebuild our crumbling infrastructure and create millions of good paying jobs. you fight for an economy that works for working families and the middle class, for our kids and our seniors — and not just for the people on top.

when you see the united states having more income and wealth inequality than almost any major country on earth, and almost all of the new income and wealth going to the top one percent, you know that that is not moral or sustainable and you demand a tax system that tells wall street, corporate america and the wealthiest people in this country that, yes, they are going to have to pay their fair share of taxes.

when you see the united states having more people in jail than any other country on earth — disproportionately african-american and latino — you are demanding that we invest in jobs and education for our young people, not more jails and incarceration.

when you saw the united states supreme court, in the citizens united case, vote to allow the wealthiest people in this country to spend unlimited amounts of money to elect the candidates they want, you are fighting for a constitutional amendment to overturn citizens united and a presidential candidate who made it absolutely clear that any nominee of his to the court would vote to overturn that disastrous decision.

while many in the republican party continue to deny the reality of climate change, you have demanded that we work with other countries in transforming our energy system away from fossil fuel to energy efficiency and sustainable energies and that we leave our kids and grandchildren a planet that is healthy and habitable.

you are not on the sidelines. you are fighting back and that's what this campaign is doing.

six months ago, when i began my campaign for president of the united states and announced that we were going to take on the political and economic establishment of this country, very few pundits took the campaign seriously. i was not widely known. we were at about 3 percent in the polls. we had no money and no political organization.

well, in the last six months things have changed. hundreds of thousands of volunteers in every state in this country are working hard on this campaign, including some 7,000 here in iowa. we have brought out to our rallies and town meetings over 300,000 americans and have drawn some of the largest crowds of any campaign. and today, i can tell you that we have raised more individual contributions than any candidate in the history of this country, at this point in a campaign, averaging all of $30 apiece.

the pundits said that, in this day and age, you can't win a campaign without a super pac, without raising millions from the wealthiest people in this country. well i am the only democratic candidate for president who does not have a super pac and we are going to prove them wrong. we will win this election without a super pac.

and by the way, eight years ago the experts talked about how another democratic candidate for president, barack obama, couldn't win. how he was unelectable. well iowa, i think we're going to prove the pundits wrong again. i believe we will make history.

my political life is not as well-known as some other candidates, so let me take a moment to tell you about some of the difficult choices i have had to make, some of the forks in the road i have encountered in my career as mayor of burlington, vermont, as a u.s. congressman and as a u.s. senator.

when i was elected mayor of the largest city in my state by 10 votes, i think it would be fair to say it was a shock to the establishment. nobody thought i would win that election. the board of alderman opposed me at every turn. i faced a fork in the road — capitulate or take them on. we decided to fight. the result was that two years later we came close to doubling voter turnout and we elected a slate of progressive candidates prepared to fight for working families. we went to work, implementing innovative housing policies, creating a people oriented waterfront, revitalizing the economy and creating great programs for our kids. now burlington is one of america's most livable cities.

i learned valuable lessons from that experience. lessons that must be applied today. and that is that when you stand with the middle class and working families and are prepared to take on powerful special interests, people will come out to vote in large numbers.

after i came to congress, corporate america, wall street, the administration in the white house and virtually all of the corporate media pushed for passage of the north american free trade agreement. i didn't believe their arguments. it didn't make sense to me then that american workers should compete with people making a fraction of our wages. i also opposed cafta and permanent normal trade relations with china. history proved me right. since 2001 we have lost nearly 60,000 factories in this country and millions of decent-paying jobs.

and let me be clear about the current trade deal that we are debating in congress, the trans-pacific partnership. it is not now, nor has it ever been, the gold standard of trade agreements. i did not support it yesterday. i do not support it today. and i will not support it tomorrow. we had a chance months ago to stop it in its tracks on the vote for fast track authority. that vote was the fork in the road and i'm glad i took the right road at the right moment in time.

in 1996, i faced another fork in the road — another very difficult political decision. it was called the defense of marriage act — brought forth by a republican-led congress. its purpose was to write discrimination against gays and lesbians into law. let us remember, that support for gay rights back in 1996 was not what it is today.

and i'm sorry to tell you that that bill won by an overwhelming majority of 342 to 57 in the house and 85 to 15 in the senate, big majorities which included too many democrats. that was not a politically easy vote. today, some are trying to rewrite history by saying they voted for one anti-gay law to stop something worse. let us be clear. that's just not true. there was a small minority opposed to discriminating against our gay brothers and sisters. not everybody held that position in 1996.

climate change is real. it is caused by human activity and it already is causing massive devastation all across our planet. it is a very sad moment in american history when almost all republicans running for president reject science and the need for bold action to combat climate change. sadly, they prefer to take the super pac campaign contributions from the koch brothers and the fossil fuel industry rather than to protect the planet for our kids and grandchildren.

and if you agree with me about the urgent need to address the issue of climate change, then you would know immediately what to do about the keystone pipeline. honestly, it wasn't that complicated. should we support the construction of a pipeline across america and accelerate the extraction of some of the dirtiest fossil fuel in the world? to me, that was a no-brainer and that is why i have opposed the keystone pipeline from the beginning.

my friends, i want to bring you back to a very eventful year and a tragic moment in the modern history of our country. the year is 2002. the issue is whether congress should vote to invade iraq. public opinion and most of the media were for the war. and it turned out that big majorities in congress were too. the vote was 296-133 in the house 77 to 23 in the senate voted to give president bush the authority to go to war. let me tell you that i listened to what bush had to say, to what cheney had to say, to what rumsfeld had to say. i didn't believe them and i voted no.

if you go to my website, you can see exactly what i said at that point and the fears that i had about the destabilization of that region if we invaded iraq. it gives me no joy to say that i was largely right about the war. i am proud to tell you when i came to that fork in the road i took the right road even though it was not the popular road at the time.

throughout my years in congress i have voted time and again to rein in wall street, the big banks and the big insurance companies that control too much wealth and wield too much power in our country. in 1999, i voted against the deregulation of wall street, including ending the glass-steagall act. the house vote was 362 to 57. yes, i was in a small minority. yes i took on wall street which spent $5 billion lobbying for this deregulation. but the vote i cast was the right vote.

at a time when the top six banks in this country have assets of almost 60 percent of our gross domestic product and have incredible economic power, the truth is that it is not congress that regulates wall street, it is wall street that regulates congress. that is why i favor breaking up the big banks, because if a bank is too big to fail it is too big to exist.

and today those wall street interests are trying to buy the government of the united states with their bundled contributions and their super pacs. well i don't take their money and i never will. and i don't have a super pac either. telling the big banks to cut it out is not going to work unless we cut it out. we have to cut out our reliance on their money if we expect to rein them in. that is why we have built a campaign that has received more than a million contributions from hundreds of thousands of contributors. it is unprecedented, and it is a real-world demonstration that together we can beat the old, corrupt and toxic system of campaign finance that is keeping in place a rigged economy that sends all the new wealth to the top. it's time to break the link between money and special interest favors in politics, and as your president i will.

so my friends, those are the choices i made when i came to the forks in the road. i think they tell you a lot about the choices i will make as president. and my message to you today is the same as it was yesterday, and will be tomorrow.

i promise you tonight as your president i will govern based on principle not poll numbers. i pledge to you that every day i will fight for the public interest not the corporate interests. i will not abandon any segment of american society — whether you're gay or black or latino or poor or working class — just because it is politically expedient at a given time.

so as we go forth tonight, our job in this election is to build a winning coalition of voters beginning here in iowa and spreading across this nation who will elect the next democratic president. i believe i can build that coalition because i know we have begun to build it in huge rallies and small gathering. people are excited to be part of a political revolution that will change this nation and give us a future to believe in.

in conclusion, let me leave you with words that have inspired me and i think fit our circumstances today. the abolitionist william lloyd garrison wrote them when attacking the evils of slavery: i am in earnest—i will not equivocate—i will not excuse—i will not retreat a single inch—and i will be heard.

well my friends, let us make sure that everyone knows that on the issues of equality, and justice, and ending a rigged economy that is held in place by a corrupt political system, on battling climate change, on halting the draining of american jobs to faraway places, on these issues and so many more:

we are in earnest;

we will not equivocate;

we will not excuse;

we will not retreat a single inch;

and on the evening of february 1st, in every precinct, in living rooms, in high school gymnasiums, and all across iowa, we will send a message to our nation and the world… we will be heard!

thank you, and i ask for your support in the caucuses. let me begin by thanking lawrence benito, the executive director of the illinois coalition for immigrant and refugee rights, for that kind introduction.

in the brief time that i have i want to focus on three issues: i want to talk about the stain of racism in this country, i want to talk about the need for real immigration reform and i want to talk about what executive actions i will take as president to make sure that we have an immigration policy that is fair and just.

as you all know, throughout history, for whatever reason racism has been a stain on human existence. as many of you may know, i lost many members of my family in europe to hitler and we know that all over this world including the united states, including north america, racism has existed and has done terrible, terrible things.

racism has plagued the united states since its inception. the atrocities committed against the native people are unspeakable as is the abomination of slavery perpetrated against people of african descent. millions of people died as a result of that racism and that exploitation of one group of people thinking they are superior to another group of people because of differences of color or of language or of customs. but racism in our country has not only impacted native americans and african americans, as you all know, it has impacted people who've come from countries from all over the world. racism has plagued this country for centuries. we should be proud however, that in recent decades we have made significant progress, real progress in overcoming racism and in defeating it, in creating a country where we judge people, as martin luther king, jr. reminded us, not on the color of their skin, not on the language they speak, not on the country where they came from, but on their character and qualities as human beings. we are making progress in this country and there will be no turning back and let me be very clear in stating that no one, not donald trump, not anyone else will be successful in dividing us based on race or our country of origin.  yes we can have an honest disagreement about immigration reform, but no we cannot and will not call an entire group of people "rapists" and "criminals."  that type of racism, that type of demagoguery must end.

america becomes a greater nation, a stronger nation when we stand together as one people and in a very loud and clear voice we say no to all forms of racism and bigotry.

i know something about immigration because my dad came to this country from poland at the age of 17 without a nickel in his pocket, without much of an education and without knowing the english language. like immigrants before and since, he worked hard to give his family a better life here in the united states. he never made much money. we lived in a three and a half room rent-controlled apartment in brooklyn, new york, but he worked hard, my mom worked hard, and they were able to create a situation where their two kids went to college.

their story, my story, your story, our story is the story of america, hardworking families coming to the united states to create a brighter future for their kids. it is a story rooted in family and fueled by hope. it is a story that continues to this day in families all across the united states. my remarks this afternoon will focus on issues of specific relevance for the latino community but also issues that are important to all americans. but when we talk about the latino community, and in fact when we talk about america, one critical piece that must be talked about is the need to enact comprehensive immigration reform.

today, we have 11 million people in this country who are undocumented, 99% of whom came to this country to improve their lives, to escape oppression, to flee desperate poverty and violence. let us be frank, today's undocumented workers play an extraordinarily important role in our economy. without these workers it is likely that much of our agricultural system would collapse. undocumented workers are doing the extremely difficult work of harvesting our crops, building our homes, cooking our meals and caring for our children. they are part of the fabric of america.

eleven million people came to this country, who are today undocumented so that they could feed their families, escape gang violence and desperate economic circumstances. let me also be very clear, that people came to this country because they knew that there were jobs here and if anyone thinks that employers throughout this country did not know that the workers that they were hiring were undocumented, they know nothing about what has gone on in this country for 50 years.

so where do we go from here? well, i supported the 2013 comprehensive immigration reform legislation in the u.s. senate. while a complicated piece of comprehensive legislation like this can always be improved and should be improved, i believe there should be a responsible path to citizenship so individuals can come out of the shadows, people can walk the streets with safety, people can hold their heads high, so that people can have the protection of the law and participate fully and openly in american society.

the senate bill attempted to accomplish this important goal and the time is long overdue for the u.s. house of representatives to take up immigration reform. the senate bill contained the provisions of the dream act that i strongly support. it is my belief that we should recognize the young men and women who comprise the dreamers for what they are, american kids who deserve the right to be in the country they know as home.

this is not to say that i do not have significant criticisms of this long and complicated bill. i believe the pathway to citizenship was unnecessarily linked to border security triggers, measures that many believe were put in place so that the path to citizenship would be delayed or even denied for the millions of undocumented individuals here and i want to change those provisions.

i also believe that the penalties and fines in the bill would be a bar for the poor, essentially preventing them from accessing the path to legal residency and eventual citizenship. to be meaningful, a pathway to citizenship needs to be achievable for the millions of workers at the lower end of the economic ladders. these and other barriers in the bill, including the years, often more than a decade, that it would take to achieve citizenship make it a flawed piece of legislation and needs to be improved.

as president, passing a legislative solution to our broken immigration system will be a top priority. but, let me be clear: i will not wait around for congress to act. instead, beginning in the first 100 days of my administration, i will work to take extensive executive action to accomplish what congress has failed to do and to build upon president obama's executive orders.

while the senate passed the dream act in its immigration bill and while the house has not acted, i think president obama did exactly the right thing through his executive order for deferred action for childhood arrivals (daca). daca and the deferred action for parents of americans and lawful permanent residents (dapa) were good first steps, but much more needs to be done.

let me tell you what i would do as president:

first, i will expand upon president obama's executive actions to provide broad administrative relief to the parents of dreamers, the parents of citizens, the parents of legal permanent residents, other family members and the rest of the immigrant population who would have been legalized if the house of representatives had only taken a vote on immigration reform.

the growth of the immigrant detention and deportation machine and the expansion of militarization on the border has perpetuated unjust policies and resulted in the separation of hundreds of thousands of immigrant families.

as president, i will work to unite families, not tear them apart.

second, i will direct immigration officers to immediately stop initiating deportations against those eligible for relief. this would include: dismantling inhumane deportation programs and private detention centers, enhancing access to justice, and reversing the criminalization of immigration.

in my view, we should not deny a path to citizenship to an undocumented parent for re-entering the country after being separated from their children or for not having a drivers' license.

third, i will direct my administration to extend humane treatment and asylum to victims of domestic violence and unaccompanied minors coming from latin america as a distinct group of people fleeing persecution. america has always been a haven for the oppressed. we cannot and must not shirk the historic role of the united states as a protector of vulnerable people fleeing persecution.

and, fourth, let's be clear: the current immigration system discriminates against women, and has got to stop. women are often the breadwinners of families, but our current immigration policies, in too many cases, treats them as mere dependents.  wives who come into this country with their families should have the same right to work as their husbands.

these are just key elements of a broader set of immigration policies that i will be releasing in the coming days as we seek to aggressively address our broken immigration system.

the bottom line is that we cannot and we should not sweep up millions of men, women, and children — many of whom have been here for years — and throw them out of the country. we need a path to citizenship to bring 11 million people out of the shadows.

and, that must happen sooner, rather than later.

thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to discuss my views. i look forward to taking your questions. thank you. thank you all for being out on this beautiful day and let me thank mo and shweta for that wonderful introduction.

i think my message to you all today is a pretty simple one. and that is, our country faces some enormous problems. and these problems are not going to be solved if people turn away from political struggle, if people throw up their hands in despair and say "i don't want to get involved; it's all crap."

you are getting a great education here in georgetown and i hope very much you will learn -- use what you have learned here to fight to create a better world and to follow in the traditions of so many people for so many years who have struggled to create a more democratic and just society.

let me take you now back to the year 1937, and in his inaugural address, in the midst of the great depression, president franklin delano roosevelt looked out at the nation, in the midst of this terrible depression, and this is what he saw and this what he talked about in his inaugural.

he saw tens of millions of people denied the basic necessities of life. he saw millions of families trying to live on incomes so meager that the pall of family disaster hung over them every single day. he saw millions of his fellow americans denied education, recreation, and the opportunity to better their lot and the lot of their children. he saw millions lacking the means to buy the products they needed.

and by their poverty -- by their lack of disposal income -- denying employment to many other millions, because when you don't have money to spend, you're not creating jobs for other people. he saw one-third of a nation ill-housed, ill-clad, and ill-nourished. and he acted -- against the ferocious opposition of the ruling class of his day, people he called "the economic royalists".

roosevelt implemented a series of programs that put millions of americans back to work, took them out of dire poverty and restored their faith in government. he redefined the relationship of the federal government to the people of our nation. he combated cynicism, fear and despair. he reinvigorated democracy. he transformed our country. and that is exactly we have to do today.

and by the way, almost everything he proposed -- almost every program -- every idea he introduced was called socialist.

i thought i would mention that just in passing.

social security -- which all of you know, transformed life for senior citizens in this country -- was defined by his opponents as socialist. the concept of the minimum wage -- that workers had to be paid at least a certain amount of money for their labor was seen as a radical intrusion into the marketplace, and was described as socialist. unemployment insurance -- when you lose your job you have something to fall back upon. abolishing child labor -- ending the fact that children of 8, 10, 12 years of age were working in factories or working in the fields. the 40-hour work week. collective bargaining -- the rights of workers to engage in negotiations with the union. strong banking regulations, deposit insurance and job programs that put millions of people to work were all described, in one way or another, as socialist.

yet, as you all know, all of these programs, and many more, have become the fabric of our nation and, in fact, the foundation of our middle class. thirty years later after roosevelt's speech in the 1960's, president lyndon johnson fought for medicare and medicaid to provide health care to millions of senior citizens and families with children, persons with disabilities and some of the vulnerable people in this country.

today, medicare does not seem to be such a terribly radical idea -- to say that when somebody gets old they should have medical insurance. but when it was proposed, once again, we heard right-wing forces describe these programs as socialistic and a threat to the american way of life. that was then. now is now.

today, in the year 2015, despite the wall street crash of 2008, which drove this country into the worst economic downturn since the great depression, the american people are clearly better off economically than they were in 1937. but here is a very hard truth that we must acknowledge, we must address, we must not sweep under the rug, and that is, despite a huge increase in technology -- and i can remember back -- i was mayor of the city of burlington, vermont -- anybody here from vermont?

ok. and when i was mayor in the 1980's, a radical development took place. we got computers in city hall.

ok? 1980's. despite a huge increase in technology and worker productivity, meaning that almost every worker in america with that technology is producing a lot more than workers that came before, despite major growth in our gdp and a huge increase in the global economy, tens of millions of american families continue today to lack the basic necessities of life, while millions more struggle every day to provide a minimal standard of living for their families.

and i hope none of you will turn your back on that reality. and the truth is -- and, again, this is a truth we must put on the table. yes, we are better off today economically than we were seven years ago when bush left office, but the other truth is that for the last 40 years -- 40 years under republican leadership and democratic leadership -- the great middle class of our country has been in decline and faith in our political system is now extremely low.

new technology, increased worker productivity, people working longer hours for lower wages, faith in our political system now extremely low. the very rich get richer. almost everyone else gets poorer. super-pacs, funded by billionaires, buy elections. koch brothers alone -- and a few of their friends -- will spend more money in this election cycle than either the democratic or republican parties.

ordinary people, working people, young people don't vote. we have an economic and political crisis in this country and the same old, same old politics and economics will not effectively address those crises.

if we are serious about transforming our country -- and i hope all of you are serious about our transforming our country. if we are serious about rebuilding the american middle class, if we are serious about re-invigorating american democracy, we need to develop a political movement which, once again, is prepared to take on and defeat a ruling class whose greed is destroying our nation.

now, i know that terms like ruling class -- probably not talked about too often here at georgetown...

not too often talked about on cbs or nbc, but that is the simple fact. and in my view, the billionaire class must be told loudly and clearly that they cannot have it all, that our government belongs to all of us; not just a handful of billionaires.

but this goes beyond politics. we need to create a culture -- an entire culture which, as pope francis has reminded us, cannot just be based on the worship of money. we must not accept a nation in which billionaires compete as to the size of their super-yachts while children in america go hungry and veterans -- men and women who have put their lives on the line to defend us -- sleep out on the streets.

today in america, we are the wealthiest nation in the history of the world. but few americans know that because so much of the new income and wealth is going to the people on top. in fact, over the last 30 years, there has been a massive redistribution of wealth. problem is, it has gone in the wrong direction.

in the last 30 years, we have seen trillions of dollars flow from the hands of working families and the middle class to the top one- tenth of one percent. a handful of people, top one-tenth of one percent, who have seen a doubling of the percentage of the wealth that they own during that period -- doubling of the percentage of wealth they own.

unbelievably and grotesquely, the top one-tenth of one percent today owns nearly as much wealth as the bottom 90 percent. one-tenth of one percent owns nearly as much wealth as the bottom 90 percent. that is not the kind of america that we should accept.

i can tell you that in my state of vermont and all over this country, it is absolutely not uncommon to see people working two jobs or three jobs to cobble together the income and the health care they and their families need. in fact, americans work longer hours than do the people of any other industrialized country.

but despite the fact that our people are working so hard -- i go around the country and i see a lot of working people, and you can see the stress and exhaustion on their faces. they're working crazy hours. husbands hardly see wives. people don't have the quality time for their kids because they're working so hard just to bring up -- bring in the income to survive. and despite all of that -- despite our people working so hard, 58 percent of all new income generated today is going to the top one percent.

today in america, as the middle class continues to disappear, median family income is $4,100 less than it was in 1999. the median male worker made over $700 less than he did 42 years ago in inflation adjusted for dollars. do you know why people are angry? they are angry because they are working terribly hard; and yet, in real, inflation adjusted for dollars, they are earning less. and they're looking all over and they say "what's happening? why is that?"

but it's not just men. last year, the median female worker earned more than $1000 less than she did in 2007, and 58 percent of all new income goes to the top one percent.

today in america, the wealthiest country in the history of world -- that's what we are today -- more than half of older workers have zero retirement savings. think about that. you're 50, 55 years of age and you're thinking, "all right, how am i going to retire? but because my wages have gone down, i have zero in the bank for retirement."

and, at the same time, all over america, you've got millions of seniors and people with disabilities trying to survive on $12,000 or $13,000 a year social security. from vermont to california, older workers are scared to death, and they are saying "how am i going to retire with dignity?"

and i want all of you -- you can get your calculators out -- not now, when you leave here. do some arithmetic and try to put yourself in the place of a senior citizen in my state of vermont where it gets cold in the winter, trying to survive on $13,000 a year and you tell me how you are going to pay for the food that you need, heat your home and buy the medicine that you need. and you know what? you can't do it.

today in america, nearly 47 million people are living in poverty and over 20 percent of our children, including 36 percent of african american kids, are living in poverty -- the highest rate of childhood poverty of almost any nation on earth. and what i want you to think about is why is it, in the wealthiest country in the history of the world, where we're seeing the proliferation of millionaires of billionaires, we have the highest rate of childhood poverty of almost any major country on earth.

today in america, 29 million americans have no health insurance and even more are under-insured with outrageously high co-payments and deductibles. in other words, people do have insurance, but i talk to people every day; they've got a $5000 deductible, $8000 deductible -- they can't go to the doctor when they need.

and then on top of that, for a wide variety of reasons, our people pay the highest prices in the world for prescription drugs. and doctors tell me all of the time, "we prescribe something -- a medicine for our patients. they can't afford to fill that medicine -- that prescription." one out of five americans cannot afford to fill the prescriptions their doctors write. what insanity is that?

today in america, youth unemployment and underemployment is over 35 percent. for african american kids it is over 50 percent. meanwhile, we have more people in jail than any other country. china -- communist, authoritarian country four times our size, we have more people in jail than china, and countless lives are being destroyed as we spend 80 billion dollars a year locking up our fellow americans.

the bottom line is that today in america, we not only have massive wealth and income inequality, but a power structure built around that inequality which protects those who have the money. today, a handful of super wealthy campaign contributors have enormous influence over the political process, while their lobbyists determine much of what goes on in congress. and any member of the united states house or senate who is prepared to tell you the truth will tell you exactly that.

now, in 1944, in his state of the union speech, president roosevelt outlined what he called a second bill of rights. you're all familiar with our bill of rights. and what roosevelt outlined was what he called a second bill of rights. this is, in my view, one of the more important speeches ever made by a president. but unfortunately, it has not gotten the attention that it deserves. so, i'm going to give it some attention today.

in his remarkable speech, this is what roosevelt stated, and i quote, "we have come to a clear realization of the fact that true individual freedom cannot exist without economic security and independence. necessitous men" -- and we would add women -- "are not free men and women." in other words, real freedom must include economic security. that was roosevelt's vision 70 years ago. it is my vision today. it is a vision that we have not yet achieved and it is time that we did.

in that speech, roosevelt described the economic rights, r-i-g-h- t-s, rights that he believed every american was entitled to; the right to a decent job at decent pay, the right to adequate food, clothing and time off from work, the right for every business, large and small, to function in an atmosphere free from unfair competition and domination by monopolies, the right of all americans to have a decent home and decent health care.

what roosevelt was stating in 1944, what martin luther king, jr. stated in similar terms 20 years later and what i believe today is that true freedom does not occur without economic security. people are not free; they're not truly free when they are unable to feed their family.

they are not truly free when they are unable to retire with dignity. they are not truly free when they are unemployed, underemployed or when they are exhausted by working 60, 70 hours a week. people are not truly free when they don't know how they're going to get medical help when they or a family member are sick.

so, let me take this opportunity to define for you simply and straightforwardly what democratic socialism means to me. it means building on what franklin delano roosevelt said when he fought for guaranteed economic rights for all americans, and it builds on what martin luther king, jr. said in 1968 when he stated, and i quote, "this country has socialism for the rich and rugged individualism for the poor," end of quote.

my view of democratic socialism builds on the success of many other countries around the world who have done a far better job than we have in protecting the needs of their working families, their elderly citizens, their children, their sick and their poor. democratic socialism means that we must reform a political system which is corrupt, that we must create an economy that works for all, not just the very wealthy.

democratic socialism, to my mind, speaks through a system which, for example, during the 1980's, and i want you to hear this, allowed wall street to spend $5 billion over a 10-year period in lobbying and campaign contributions in order to get deregulated. they wanted the government off of their backs, they wanted to do whatever they wanted to do -- spent $5 billion over a 10-year period on lobbying and campaign contributions.

then 10 years later, after their greed and recklessness and illegal behavior led to their collapse, what our system enabled them to do is to get bailed out by the united states government, which through congress and the fed, provided trillions of dollars in aid to wall street.

in other words, wall street used their wealth and power to get congress to do their bidding for deregulation. and then when wall street collapsed, they used their wealth and power to get bailed out; quite a system. and then to add insult to injury, we were told that not only were the banks too big to fail, we were told that the bankers were too big to jail.  and this is the system. young people who get caught possessing marijuana, they get police records and many, many hundreds of thousands of them have received police records which have impacted their lives in very serious ways.

on the other hand, wall street ceos who helped destroy the economy, they don't get police records; they get raises in their salaries. and this is what dr. martin luther king, jr. meant when he talked about socialism for the rich and rugged individualism for everyone else.

in my view, it is time we had democratic socialism for working families, not just for wall street billionaires and large corporations. it means that we should not be providing welfare for corporations. it means that we should not be providing huge tax breaks for the wealthiest people in this country or trade policies which boost corporate profits while they result in workers losing their jobs.

it means that we create a government which works for all of the american people, not just powerful special interests. it means that economic rights must be an essential part of what america stands for. among many other things, it means that health care should be a right of all people, not a privilege.

now, i know that there are some people out there who think this is just an incredibly radical idea. imagine, in the united states of america, all of us having health care as a right. but i hope all of you know this is not a radical idea; it is a conservative idea.

it is an idea and a practice that exists in every other major country on earth, you know, not just in scandinavia, in denmark or sweden or finland or norway; it exists in canada. i live 50 miles away from canada; not a radical idea. it exists in france, germany, taiwan. all over the world, countries have made the determination that all of their people are entitled to health care, and i believe the time is long overdue for the united states to join the rest of the world.

a medicare-for-all single-payer program, which i support, would not only guarantee health care for all people, not only save middle class families and our entire nation significant sums of money -- because all of you should know that our health care system is by far the most expensive per capita of any system on earth. but a medicare- for-all single-payer program would radically improve the lives of all americans and bring about significant improvements in our economy.

think about it. people who get sick will not have to worry about paying a deductible or making a copayment. radical idea; when they're sick, they can actually go to the doctor and not end up in the emergency room at a much greater expense to the system. think about it. business owners will not have to spend enormous amounts of time worrying about how they're going to provide health care for their employees.

think about it -- and we don't talk about this very much; you've got millions of workers in this country who are staying on jobs -- in jobs which they do not want to stay in, but they're there because they have a decent health care program for themselves and their families.

think what it means when young people or anybody else can say, "you know what? this is the job that i love. this is what i want to do and i'm going to go out and start this business or do this work and i don't have to worry about health care because all of us in america have health care."

and by the way, what a medicare-for-all system will bring about is ending the absurdity of the american people paying by far the highest prices in the world for prescription drugs.

now, when i talk about democratic socialism, what that means to me is that in the year 2015, a college degree today is equivalent to what a high school degree was 50 years ago. and what that means is that public education must today allow every person in this country who have -- has the ability, the qualifications and the desire the right to go to a public college or university tuition free.

is this a radical socialistic idea? i don't think so. it exists in many countries all over the world. and you know what? it used to exist in the united states of america. we had great universities, like the university of california, the city university of new york, virtually tuition free.

democratic socialism means that our government does everything it can to create a full employment economy. it makes far more sense to me to put millions of people back to work rebuilding our crumbling infrastructure than to have a real unemployment rate of almost 10 percent. it is far smarter to invest in jobs and educational opportunities for young people who are unemployed than to lock them up and invest in jails and incarceration.

democratic socialism means that if somebody works 40 hours a week, that person should not be living in poverty; that we must raise the minimum wage to a living wage, 15 bucks an hour over the next several years.

it means that we join the rest of the world and pass the very strong paid family and medical leave legislation now sitting in congress.

now, i want you to think about this and i really -- i want you to see what goes on in our country today. it's not only that every other major country -- i'm not talking about europe or scandinavia; virtually every country in the world, poor country, small country, reached the conclusion that when a woman has a baby, she should not be forced to be separated from that newborn baby after a week or two and have to go back to work.

making sure that moms and dads can stay home and get to love their babies is a family value that we should support. and that is why i want and will fight to end the absurdity of the united states being one of the only countries on earth that does not guarantee at least three months of paid family and medical leave.

democratic socialism to me means that we have government policy, strong government policy, which does not allow the greed and profiteering of the fossil fuel industry to destroy our environment and our planet.

and it means to me that we have a moral responsibility to combat climate change and leave this planet healthy and habitable for our kids and our grandchildren.

democratic socialism means that in a democratic, civilized society, the wealthiest people and the largest corporations must pay their fair share of taxes.

yes, innovation, entrepreneurship and business success should be rewarded, but greed for the sake of greed is not something that public policy should support.

it is not acceptable to me that in the last period of time, last two years, 15 of the wealthiest people in this country, 15 people, saw their wealth increase in this rigged economy by $170 billion. got it? two years, 15 people, $170 billion increase in their wealth; that is more wealth than is owned by the bottom 130 million americans.

let us not forget what pope francis has so eloquently stated, and i quote, "we have created new idols. the worship of the golden calf of old has found a new and heartless image in the cult of money and the dictatorship of an economy which is faceless and lacking any truly human goal," end of quote.

in other words...

we have got to do better than that. not a political issue, it's not an economic issue; it is a cultural issue. we have got to stop worshiping people who make billions and billions and billions of dollars while we have the highest rate of childhood poverty of any major country.

it's not acceptable to me that major corporations stash their profits in the cayman islands and other tax havens to avoid paying $100 billion a year in taxes. it is not acceptable that hedge fund managers pay a lower effective tax rate than nurses or truck drivers.

it is not acceptable that billionaire families are able to leave virtually all of their wealth to their families without paying a reasonable estate tax. it is not acceptable that wall street speculators are able to gamble trillions of dollars in the derivatives market without paying a nickel in taxes on that speculation.

democratic socialism to me does not just mean that we must create a nation of economic and social justice and environmental sanity. of course, it does mean that, but it also means that we must create a vibrant democracy based on the principle of one person, one vote.

it is extremely sad, and i hope all of you will pay a lot of attention to this issue; it is extremely sad that the united states, one of the oldest, most stable democracies in the world, has one of the lowest voter turnouts of any major country and that millions of young people and working people have given up on the political process entirely.

in the last midterm election just a year ago, 63 percent of the american people didn't vote; 80 percent of young people did not vote.

clearly, despite the efforts of many republican governors who want to suppress the vote to make it harder for people of color and old people to participate in the political system, our job together is to make it easier for people to vote, not harder for people to vote.

it is not a radical idea, and i will fight for this as hard as i can as president, to say that everyone in this country who is 18 years of age or older is registered to vote, end of discussion.

so, the next time that you hear me attacked as a socialist, like tomorrow...

remember this: i don't believe government should take over, you know, the grocery store down the street or own the means of production. but i do believe that the middle class and the working families of this country who produce the wealth of this country deserve a decent standard of living and that their incomes should go up, not down.

i do believe in private companies that thrive and invest and grow in america, companies that create jobs here rather than companies that are shutting down in america and increasing their profits by exploiting low-wage labor abroad.

i believe that most americans can pay lower taxes if hedge fund managers who make billions manipulating the marketplace finally start paying the taxes that they should.

i don't believe in special treatment for the top one percent, but i do believe in equal treatment for african americans who are right to proclaim the moral principle that black lives matter.

i despise appeals to nativism and prejudice, a lot of which we have been hearing in recent months. and i do proudly believe in immigration reform...

that gives hispanics and others a pathway to citizenship and a better life.

and while i'm on that subject, let me just say a real word of concern to what i've been hearing from some of the republican candidates for president in recent months. people can have honest disagreements about immigration or about anything else; that's called democracy. but people should not be using the political process to inject racism into the debate.

and if donald trump and others who refer to latinos as -- people from mexico as criminals and rapists, if they want to open that door, our job is to shut that door and shut it tight.

this country has gone too far. too many people have suffered and too many people have died for us to continue hearing racist words coming from major political leaders.

now, i don't believe in some foreign ism, but i do believe in american idealism. and one of the pleasures, one of the real joys that i've experienced on this campaign so far, being here today with you and being all over the country, is seeing the huge numbers of young people who are coming out who want to make this country better, who want to use their intelligence and their energy to address the many problems that we have. so, i want to thank all of the young people, here and all over this country, for their idealism and do not, do not, do not become cynical.

i am not running for president because it is my turn; not quite. i was born in a three-and-a-half room apartment in a working class family in brooklyn, new york. i don't think...

oh, ok. so, i got brooklyn, i got vermont...

and by the way, i visited california...

but in seriousness, it is not quite my turn; that's not why i'm running for president. but i am running for president in order for all of us to be able to  have been carried into practice for unless there is security here at home there cannot be last peace -- lasting peace in the world, end quote.

now, i am not running for president to pursue reckless adventures abroad but to rebuild america's strength at home. i will never hesitate to defend this nation, but i will never send our sons and daughters to war under false pretense or pretenses about dubious battles with no end in sight.

and as we discuss foreign policy, i know that all of you share with me your shock and your horror at what happened in paris and you share with me your condolences for the families who lost loved ones and your hopes and prayers that those who were wounded will recover.

and also, those same thoughts go out to the families of those who lost loved ones in the russian flight that we believe was taken down by an isis bomb and also those who lost their lives to terrorist attacks in lebanon and elsewhere.

to my mind, it is clear that the united states must pursue policies to destroy the brutal and barbaric isis regime and to create conditions that prevent fanatical extremist ideologies from flourishing, but we cannot and should not do it alone.

our response must begin with an understanding of past mistakes and missteps in our previous approaches to foreign policy. it begins with the acknowledgement that unilateral military action should be a last resort, not a first resort...

and that ill-conceived military decisions, such as the invasion of iraq, can wreak far-reaching devastation and destabilization over regions for decades.

it begins with the reflection that the failed policy decisions of the past, rushing to war, regime change in iraq or toppling mohammed mossadegh in iran in 1953. mossadegh was the president. cia and others got rid of him to protect british petroleum interests.

the shah of iran came in, a brutal dictator, and he was thrown out by the islamic revolution and that is where we are in iran today. decisions have consequences, often unintended consequences.

so, whether it was saddam hussein or mossadegh or guatemalan president arbenz in 1954 in guatemala, brazilian president goulart in 1964, chilean president allende in 1973, this type of regime change, this type of throwing -- overthrowing governments we may not like often does not work, often makes a bad and difficult decision even worse. these are lessons we must learn.

after world war ii -- after world war ii in response to the fear of soviet aggression, european nations and the united states established nato, the north american treaty organization, an organization based on shared interest and goals and the notion of a collective defense against a common enemy. it is my belief that we must expand on these ideals and solidify our commitments to work together to combat the global threat of terror.

we must create a new organization like nato to confront the security threats of the 21st century, an organization that emphasizes cooperation and collaboration to defeat the rise of violent extremism and, importantly, to address the root causes underlying these brutal acts. we must work with our nato partners, we must work to expand the coalition with russia, and we must work with members of the arab league.

but let us be very clear. while the united states and other western nations have the strength of our militaries and our political systems, the fight against isis is a struggle for the soul of islam and countering violent extremism, and destroying isis must be done primarily by muslim nations with the strong support of their global partners.

now, this has been my view long before paris but i am very happy to tell you that these same sentiments have been echoed by people like jordan's king abdullah ii in a speech just sunday in which he said that terrorism is the greatest threat to our region -- the gulf region, middle east -- and that muslims must lead the fight against it.

he noted that confronting extremism is both a regional and international responsibility and that it is incumbent on muslim nations and communities to confront those who seek to hijack their societies and their religion with generations of intolerance and violent ideology.

and let me congratulate king abdullah not only for his wise remarks, but also for the role that his small country is playing in attempting to address the horrific refugee crisis in that region.

a new and strong coalition -- coalition of western powers, muslim nations and countries like russia must come together in a strongly coordinated way to combat isis, to seal the borders that fighters are currently flowing across, to share counterterrorism intelligence, to turn off the spigot of terrorist financing and to end support for exploiting extremist ideologies.

now, what does that mean? what it means is that, in many cases, we must ask more from those countries in the gulf region. while jordan, turkey, egypt and lebanon, in their own ways, have accepted their responsibilities for taking in syrian refugees, other countries in the region have done nothing or very little.

equally important -- and this is a point that may make some people uncomfortable, but it is a point that must be made -- countries in the region, like saudi arabia, kuwait, qatar, the uae -- countries of enormous wealth and resources have contributed far too little in the fight against isis. that must change.

king abdullah is absolutely right when he says that the muslim nations must lead the fight against isis and that includes and must include some of the most wealthy and powerful nations in the region who up to this point have done far too little.

saudi arabia, turns out, has the third largest defense budget in the world, yet instead of fighting isis, they are focused more on a campaign to oust iran-backed houthi rebels in yemen.

kuwait, a country whose ruling family was restored to power by the united states driving saddam hussein's iraq out of kuwait, has been a well-known -- kuwait -- people in kuwait have been well known sources of financing for isis and other violent extremists.

it has been reported that qatar will spend up to $200 billion on the 2022 world cup, including the construction of an enormous number of facilities to host that event. $200 billion on hosting a soccer event, yet very little to fight isis. worse still, it has been widely reported that the government there has not been vigilant in stemming the flow of terrorist financing and that qatari individuals and organizations funnel money to some of the most extreme terrorist groups in the region.

all of this has got to change. wealthy and powerful muslim nations in the region can no longer sit on the sidelines and expect the united states, our young men and women and our taxpayers to do it for them. they have got to come up to the plate.

as we develop a strongly coordinated effort, we need a commitment from these countries that the fight against isis takes precedence over the religious and ideological differences that hamper the kind of cooperation we desperately need.

further, we all understand that bashar al-assad, president of syria, is a brutal dictator who has -- who has slaughtered many of his own people.

i am pleased that we saw last weekend diplomats from all over the world, known as the international syria support group, set a timetable for a syrian-led political transition with an open and fair election. these are the promising beginnings of a collective effort to end the bloodshed and move toward a political transition in syria.

the diplomatic plan for assad's transition from power is a good step in a united front, but our major priority must be to defeat isis. nations all over the world who share a common interest in protecting themselves against international terrorism must make the destruction of isis the highest priority. nations in the region must commit that instead of turning a blind eye, they will commit their resources to preventing the free flow of terrorist finances and fighters to syria and iraq.

we need a commitment that they will counter the violent rhetoric that fuels terrorism rhetoric that often occurs within their very borders. this is the model which we must pursue in order to address the global threats that we face.

while individual nations obviously have historic disputes -- the united states and russia now have very strong differences of opinion on some very serious issues, iran and saudi arabia, to put it mildly, do not like each other.

but the time is now to do everything possible to put aside those differences to work toward a common goal of destroying isis. sadly, as we have seen recently, no country is immune from attacks by the violent organization called isis. thus, we must work with our partners in europe, the gulf region, africa and southeast asia, all along the way, asking the hard questions, whether their actions are serving our unified purpose.

the bottom line is that isis must be destroyed but it cannot be defeated by the united states alone. a new and effective coalition must be formed with the muslim nations leading the effort on the ground while the united states and other major forces provide the support they need.

let me conclude by once again thanking all of you for being here today. all across this country there is a significant alienation from the political process. people look to washington and they throw their hands up and they said what in god's name is going on there? why aren't our senators and our congressmen paying attention to our needs? why aren't we developing a rational foreign policy rather than talking again about getting involved in a quagmire in the middle east which could lead to perpetual warfare?

so let me conclude just by saying this. the problems that we face as a nation are indeed very, very serious. i talked -- i've talked on some. there's a lot we haven't even touched upon.

but, by and large, all of these problems were caused by bad human decisions and, if we come together, if we stand together, if we do not allow ourselves to be divided up by race, by whether we're gay or whether we're straight, whether we're born in america, we weren't born in america, whether a male or a female, if we stand together and if we focus on how we can create sane foreign policy, how we can rebuild the middle class, how we can combat climate change, how we can create a nation in which we end racism and homophobia, if we are prepared to do that -- if you, as young people are prepared to engage in the political process, i have no doubt that there is nothing, nothing, nothing that together we cannot accomplish.

thank you all very much. i think the reason that i have always throughout my political career, going way back when i was mayor of burlington, defined myself as a democratic socialist is that that, in fact, is my vision. and my vision is not just making modest changes around the edge. it is transforming american society to make it into a much more vibrant democracy and an economy which works much, must better for working families.

and by the word socialism, what is implicit in that to me is that it is imperative that if we are serious about change -- and a lot of people want change -- but at the end of the day, real change does not take place unless we have the courage to take on the very powerful special interests that control our country.

now, that's my view. not everybody here may agree with me and certainly most people in congress would not. but i think at the end of the day, what we have got to recognize is not just that we are experiencing mass income and wealth inequality or declining middle class, but that a small number of people have extraordinary power. and if we are not prepared to take them on and to tell them that they cannot run the government for their own interests, the real change that many of us want will never take place.

so when i use the word socialist -- and i know some people aren't comfortable about it -- i say that it is imperative that we create a political revolution, that millions of people get involved in the political process and that we create a government that works for all, not just the few. well, for a start, david, given the fact that we have seen trillions of dollars being transferred in the last 30 years from the middle class to the top one-tenth of 1 percent, we start from a position that there is already a lot of money out there.

and that is an important point that has to be made. you know, we're not a poor country. we are the wealthiest country in the history of the world, and we should be doing a lot better for our working people, should not be having 47 million people living in poverty. but how do you create wealth? of course wealth is -- has to be created. and one of the points that i made in my remarks -- let me give you one example of it. i believe that we significantly strengthen our economy by having a medicare-for-all single-payer system which will free millions of people to get involved in creating businesses and in creating jobs who today are trapped at work only because they get the health insurance that that employer is now providing.

i think that if you have a trade policy not designed by corporate america to shut down plants in america and move abroad, but a trade policy which works for the american worker, you can create over a period of years millions of decent paying jobs.

i believe that when you raise the minimum wage to $15 an hour, it's not only the right thing to do but, as roosevelt talked about in the 1930's, when you put money -- disposable income into the hands of people today who have no disposal income, they will then take that money, spend it and create jobs.

so i think the policies that i am advocating will, in fact, create wealth, will strengthen the economy. these are diametrically opposed, an opposite, to this trickle-down economic theory that says if we give tax breaks to billionaires at wall street, somehow or another that will benefit the middle class and the poor. history has been very clear. that is a false doctrine; it hasn't worked.  for a start, the answer to the first question is, yes, the legislation that i've introduced does a number of things. it makes public colleges and universities tuition free. it also addresses the very significant crisis in this country of millions of people paying very high interest rates on their student debt. and i suspect some of you guys are going to be graduating here deeply in debt. i see at least one person there.

i suspect there are many more. all right?

so the -- the -- what we do are two things, all right? public colleges, universities, tuition free, and then what we also say is that it is a little bit crazy that today you have many people out there who are paying interest rates on their student debt of six, eight, 10 percent when we can refinance our homes at three or four percent.

so what our legislation does is allow people the ability and the freedom to get the lowest possible interest rates on their debt that they can get. and that will save people all over this country collectively many, many billions of dollars.

now, if you add those two features together, free tuition at public colleagues, universities, substantially lowering interest rates on student debt, it is an expensive proposition. it costs about $70 billion a year. and yes, it can be paid for by a tax on wall street speculation.

all right, second point about private universities. of course, we know that georgetown and -- and many other private universities do an extraordinary job and we're all proud of the quality of education they provide. our legislation includes substantially increasing pell grants to make sure that working class and lower income families, middle class families can get the help they need if they choose to send their kids here to georgetown or harvard or any place else.

we also significantly increase work student -- student work programs so that universities can have funds available to -- to employ students on campus. so your point is well taken. our legislation also makes private colleges and universities less expensive ok. first of all, let me respond to the first question and -- you know, and -- and i have a lot of respect for people who may be pacifists; i am not a pacifist.

what, in fact, i voted for -- i voted against the very first gulf war, which i had to vote on about -- within the first month that i was elected to congress. i think history will record that as the right vote. and then in 2002, after listening to bush and cheney and donald rumsfeld, and listening carefully to what they had to say, i concluded that they were not telling the truth and i voted against the war in iraq.

but i did vote for the war in afghanistan because i thought that osama bin laden should be held accountable and i did vote for president clinton's effort to end the ethnic cleansing in kosovo. so no, i am not a pacifist. i think that war should be the last resort, but we have the strongest military on earth and, of course, we should be prepared to use it when it is necessary.

in terms of where we are right now, i think the main point that i try to make in my remarks is i think it would be a terrible mistake for many, many reasons for the united states virtually unilaterally to get involved in the war in syria or reinvolved in the war in iraq.

and the nightmare is that we send our troops in there in combat, they come back in caskets. we send more troops in, a plane gets shot down. we send more planes in, and 20 or 30 years from how we're still talking about how we get out of the quagmire in that region of the world.

i agree very, very strongly with king abdullah who is absolutely right. what is going on there is a struggle for the soul of islam. there are millions and millions and millions of muslims who detest and are disgusted with what isis and other extremist groups are doing. but now they are going to have to get into the process. it is their troops that are going to be on the ground. we should be supportive, and i support president obama's efforts with airstrikes, with special forces. but the leadership must come from the muslim nations.

in terms of how we protect our country, obviously, we have got to be super vigilant against terrorist attacks. i know there's a lot of discussion about refugees. let me say a word on that. i am not happy to hear what i have heard in recent days about people who are talking about going into or maybe closing down mosques in america. i'm not happy about hearing that we should close our borders to men, women and children who have been displaced, driven out of their homes because of terrorism.

and i believe that, yes, after thorough screening, which we have the capability of doing, working with the rest of the world, we should accept refugees from that region. that's the moral thing to do and accepting refugees is what america has always done and i think it's improper to turn our back on these people now. look. obviously, as i hope i made clear this afternoon, organizations like isis, terrorist organizations, are a major threat. they have got to be destroyed. but if you look into the future -- this is not bernie sanders -- this is the cia, this is defense department, this is countries all over the world, this is what they are saying. if we do not get our act together, if there is more drought around the world, if there is more flooding, if there are more extreme weather disturbances, if sea levels continue to rise and flood coastal regions, there will be a massive displacement of people.

people need water; people need land to grow their crops. and if they do not have that land and water, they're going to migrate and they're going to be in competition with other peoples for limited natural resources. and when that happens, according to the cia, according to our own defense department, that lays the groundwork for international conflict.

so in my view, it is not debatable. of course, climate change is a major, major inducement to international -- international conflict and also to terrorism. for example, right now in syria as a result of a sustained drought, people have left the rural areas, flooded into the cities, causing more instability and becoming people who could succumb to extremist propaganda. massive instability in syria.

so what we have to do -- and by the way, you know, when i was your age, the challenge of my generation was civil rights. and all over this country -- and i was involved when i was at the university of chicago -- but young people stood up and they said you know what? we're going to end segregation in america. and those of us who were northern schools helped out financially, our brothers and sisters fighting in the south were getting their heads busted open and we did what we could where we were.

my guess among many other issues that are out there, one of your great challenges today continue the fight against racism and sexism and homophobia. but also understand that we are fighting for the future of the planet and if we do not move aggressively -- i'm on the energy committee in the senate and the environmental committee. i've talked to scientists all over the world and what they are telling us is we have a small window of opportunity to transform our energy system away from fossil fuel into energy efficiency and sustainable energy.

we need to take on the fossil fuel industry who are looking at short term profits ahead of the future of this planet. and i hope you will be involved in that effort to transform our energy system. look, when you are in congress, by definition, you compromise every day. and you all should know that when i was in the house of representatives -- i was there for 16 years -- on certain years, i ended up getting more amendments passed on the floor of the house than any other member of congress because when there was an issue out there that i could work with republicans on, and they were in the majority, we put together a pretty good coalition.

just two years ago, i worked as chairman of the u.s. senate committee on veterans' affairs. i worked with people like -- republicans like john mccain in the senate and people like congressman jeff miller over in the house who's chairman of the veterans committee there, to put together the most comprehensive veterans' health care bill passed in recent memory.

so yes, i can compromise. but here is the point that i want to make. on many of the issues that i have talked about, virtually all of them, these are not radical extremist ideas. i am not coming before the american people and saying look, i am this radical wild- eyed socialist, crazy ideas but listen to me. you know, that's not the issue.

look at the issues. we want to raise the minimum wage to $15 an hour, raising the minimum wage widely popular. i want to create 13 million jobs by rebuilding our crumbling infrastructure, wildly popular. pay equity for women workers, wildly popular. making -- there it is, popular idea, all right.

making public colleges and universities tuition free and lowering student debt, widely popular. combating climate change. there are some republicans who still don't accept it but most americans do. all right? asking the rich to start paying their fair share of taxes, vast majority of the americans think that that's right.

so here's my point, here's my point. the real question is sure, you've got to compromise, but the really more important point is why is congress so far out of touch with where the american people are at? the republican agenda is among other things to cut social security, medicare and medicaid, and give huge tax breaks to billionaires and to ignore the planetary crisis of climate change.

how many people believe in that agenda? i don't know, five percent, 10 percent. surely a very small minority of people. so when i talk about the political revolution, when i talk about transforming american politics, what i am talking about is bringing in the voices of millions and millions of people who have given up on the political process, to have their views and their needs being heard by congress. when that happens, everything that i talked about will be passed.

if that does not happen, virtually nothing will be passed. so what this campaign from my perspective is about -- and i say this in every speech that i give -- it's not just electing bernie sanders to be president, i surely would appreciate your support.

but very honestly, it is much more than that because no president, not bernie sanders or anybody else, can implement the kinds of changes we need in this country unless millions of people begin to stand up and fight back. and i think right here on college campuses all over this country, we're beginning to see that fight back, we're beginning to see that fight back among low-wage workers. we're going out into the streets and saying you know what, we can't make it on $8 or $9 an hour. raise the minimum wage to $15 an hour.

we are beginning to see that movement develop and i hope you will be part of that movement because if you are, we can, in fact, transform this country.

thank you all very much. let me begin by thanking all of you who are here today for doing what too few americans do. thank you all, every person in this room, for standing up for american democracy and participating in the political process.

let me also say that if these were normal times many people in our country could be supportive of establishment politics, establishment economics and establishment foreign policy. but these are not normal times. and what i see, from coast to coast is an american people crying out for change, for real change. they do not want the same-old, same-old. they want a political revolution.

when, in the last election, 63 percent of the american people didn't vote, when 80 percent of young people and low income people didn't vote; when millions of people have given up on the political process; when there is profound disgust across the political spectrum with a campaign finance system that allows millionaires and billionaires to buy elections through their super pacs, now is not the time for establishment politics. now is the time for a political revolution.

when most americans understand that we are living in a rigged economy where almost all of the new income and wealth is going to the top 1 percent, where wall street continues to dominate our economic and political life, when corporate profits soar while millions of our children live in poverty — now is not the time for establishment economics. now is the time for a political revolution.

when our foreign policy, for the last many decades, has failed the american people, has led to wars, like the war in iraq which we should never have gotten into. now is not the time for more establishment foreign policy.

we began this campaign seven months ago. we had no organization, no money, very little national name recognition and were at 3 percent in the polls. today, we have hundreds of thousands of volunteers in every state in the country, including some 5,600 here in new hampshire. today, without a super pac, we have more than 800,000 individual contributors — more than any candidate in the history of our country at this point in a campaign for a first term. and, today, with your help, we are poised to pull off one of the great political upsets in the history of our country. we have come a long way in seven months. the people of this country want real change.

i am running for president because we live in the wealthiest nation in the history of the world but that reality means little to most americans because — in a very rigged economy — the rich get much richer while almost everybody else becomes poorer. the issue of wealth and income inequality is the great moral issue of our time. it is the great economic issue of our time. it is the great political issue of our time. and it is an issue that, together, we will resolve.

i am running for president because the great middle class of this country, once the envy of the world, has been disappearing for the last 40 years. today, husbands and wives, single moms and even grandparents, are working longer hours for lower wages — and we have the highest rate of childhood poverty of almost any major nation on earth.

i am running for president because we need an economy that works for working families, not just for millionaires and billionaires.

i am running for president because we need to raise the minimum wage to $15 an hour over the next few years. we need pay equity for women workers. we need to pass the paid family and medical leave act now in congress. paying $1.38 cents-a-week more is a good investment for families throughout this country who will receive 12 weeks of paid family and medical leave.

i am running for president because we need to rebuild our crumbling infrastructure, invest $1 trillion in our roads and bridges and rail systems and create up to 13 million decent-paying jobs.

i am running for president because when youth unemployment and underemployment is at 30 or 40 or 50 percent we need to invest in jobs and education, not more jails and incarceration. we must not continue to have more people in jail than any other country on earth. we need major reforms in a very broken criminal justice system. we need to stop the killing of unarmed african-americans by the police. we need to rethink the so-called war on drugs and take marijuana out of the federal controlled substance act. we need to treat substance abuse as a serious health issue, not a criminal issue. we need to understand that in new hampshire, vermont and across this country, we have a major crisis in opiate addiction and we need a revolution in mental health treatment so that all people — regardless of their income — can get the help they need.

i am running for president because 11 million undocumented people cannot continue living in the shadows. we need comprehensive immigration reform and a path toward citizenship.

and loudly and clearly, we must tell the republicans. no. we will not cut social security benefits for the elderly and disabled veterans. we will expand those benefits by lifting the cap on taxable income and developing a new formula to determine cost-of-living adjustments.

i am running for president because it is time that wall street, corporate america and the billionaire class understand that they cannot have it all, that they are going to have to start paying their fair share of taxes. it makes no sense that every year we lost $100 billion in tax revenue because large, profitable corporations stash their profits in the cayman islands and other tax havens. it makes no sense that large profitable corporations like pfizer think they can leave this country and become foreign companies to avoid paying their fair share of taxes, while they continue charging us the highest prices in the world for prescription drugs.

i am running for president because, in a highly competitive global economy, we need to make certain that all of our young people who have the ability and qualifications are able to get a college income regardless of their family income. that is why we are going to make public colleges and universities tuition free, and why we are going to substantially lower interest rates on student debt. and that is why we're going to pay for it with a tax on wall street speculation.

i am running for president because as a result of the disastrous supreme court decision in the citizens united case, the american political system has been totally corrupted, and the foundations of american democracy are being undermined. in america, millionaires and billionaires should not be able to buy elections. as president, i will fight to overturn citizens united and move toward public funding of elections. i will also move to end the voter suppression imposed by many republican governors. we should have one of the highest voter turnouts in the world, not one of the lowest.

i am running for president because, in these difficult times, against vitriolic republican rhetoric, we must protect a woman's right to choose and we must defend planned parenthood. and today let me send my condolences to the families of those who were killed in friday's attack at planned parenthood in colorado. we must also fight to make certain that our gay brothers and sisters have the right to marry.

i am running for president because we must leave this planet in a way that is healthy and habitable for our kids and grandchildren. despite what many of my republican colleagues think, climate change is real. it is caused by human activity. it already is causing devastating problems throughout the planet. we must lead the world in combatting climate change, and transforming our energy system away from fossil fuels to energy efficiency and sustainable energy. republicans must start worrying about the planet they will leave their kids and grandchildren, not about the campaign contributions they get from the koch brothers and the fossil fuel industry.

because climate change is the greatest environmental challenge of our time, i opposed the keystone xl tar sands pipeline from day one. and that is why — right here in new hampshire — i believe the northeast energy direct pipeline that would carry fracked natural gas for 400 miles through 17 communities is a bad idea — and should be opposed.

as everybody knows, we live in a difficult and dangerous world, and there are people out there who want to do us harm. as president, i will defend this nation — but i will do it responsibly. we do not need a quote-unquote "tough foreign policy." we need a quote-unquote "smart foreign policy" that achieves our goals.

as a member of congress, i voted against the war in iraq in 2002. i listened carefully to what president bush, dick cheney and others in the bush administration were saying — and i didn't believe them. and it gives me no joy to tell you that much of what i feared would happen, in terms of the destabilization of the region, did happen.

today, we are confronted with a barbaric organization, called isis — an organization which must be destroyed — but i hope that we learned some of the very painful lessons of the past. and that is that we cannot and should not attempt to do it alone. we cannot and should not be trapped in perpetual warfare in the middle east.

we need to put together a broad coalition including the strong participation of the muslim countries in the region. while the u.s. and other western nations have the strength of our militaries and political systems, the fight against isis is a struggle for the soul of islam, and countering violent extremism and destroying isis must be done primarily by muslim nations — with the strong support of their global partners — the u.s., the u.k., france, germany, russia and iran.

these same sentiments have been echoed by those in the region. jordan's king abdallah ii said in recent speech that terrorism is the "greatest threat to our region" and that muslims must lead the fight against it. he noted that confronting extremism is both a regional and international responsibility, and that it is incumbent on muslim nations and communities to confront those who seek to hijack their societies and generations with intolerance and violent ideology.

and let me congratulate king abdallah not only for his wise remarks, but also for the role that his small country is playing in attempting to address the horrific refugee crisis in the region.

what does all of this mean? well, it means that, in many cases, we must ask more from those in the region. while jordan, turkey, egypt, and lebanon have accepted their responsibilities for taking in syrian refugees, other countries in the region have done nothing or very little.

equally important, and this is a point that must be made — countries in the region like saudi arabia, kuwait, qatar, uae — countries of enormous wealth and resources — have contributed far too little in the fight against isis. that must change. king abdallah is absolutely right when he says that that the muslim nations must lead the fight against isis, and that includes some of the most wealthy and powerful nations in the region, who, up to this point have done far too little.

saudi arabia has the third largest defense budget in the world, yet instead of fighting isis they have focused more on a campaign to oust iran-backed houthi rebels in yemen. kuwait, a country whose ruling family was restored to power by u.s. troops after the first gulf war, has been a well-known source of financing for isis and other violent extremists. it has been reported that qatar will spend $200 billion on the 2022 world cup, including the construction of an enormous number of facilities to host that event — $200 billion on hosting a soccer event, yet very little to fight against isis. worse still, it has been widely reported that the government has not been vigilant in stemming the flow of terrorist financing, and that qatari individuals and organizations funnel money to some of the most extreme terrorist groups, including al nusra and isis.

all of this has got to change. wealthy and powerful muslim nations in the region can no longer sit on the sidelines and expect the united states to do their work for them. as we develop a strongly coordinated effort, we need a commitment from these countries that the fight against isis takes precedence over the religious and ideological differences that hamper the kind of cooperation that we desperately need.

let me conclude by reminding you all of one important political fact. republicans win when the voter turnout is low. democrats win when voter turnout is high. i believe from the bottom of my heart that our campaign is striking a nerve with working people, with young people, with many who have given up on the political process. i believe that our campaign is creating the kind of excitement needed to not only retain the white house but regain the senate, do well in house races and win governors' chairs all across this country. this is the campaign of the future. this is the campaign for real change. please join the political revolution.the american people are catching on. they understand that something is profoundly wrong when, in our country today, the top one-tenth of 1 percent own almost as much wealth as the bottom 90 percent and when the 20 richest people own more wealth than the bottom 150 million americans — half of our population. they know that the system is rigged when the average person is working longer hours for lower wages, while 58 percent of all new income goes to the top 1 percent.

they also know that a handful of people on wall street have extraordinary power over the economic and political life of our country. as most people know, in the 1990s and later, the financial interests spent billions of dollars in lobbying and campaign contributions to force through congress the deregulation of wall street, the repeal of the glass-steagall act and the weakening of consumer protection laws in states.

they spent this money in order to get the government off their backs and to show the american people what they could do with that new-won freedom. well, they sure showed the american people. in 2008, the greed, recklessness and illegal behavior on wall street nearly destroyed the u.s. and global economy.

millions of americans lost their jobs, their homes and their life savings.

while wall street received the largest taxpayer bailout in the history of the world with no strings attached, the american middle class continues to disappear, poverty is increasing and the gap between the very rich and everyone else is growing wider and wider. and wall street executives still receive huge compensation packages as if the financial crisis they created never happened.

greed, fraud, dishonesty and arrogance, these are the words that best describe the reality of wall street today.

so, to those on wall street who may be listening today, let me be very clear. greed is not good. in fact, the greed of wall street and corporate america is destroying the fabric of our nation. and, here is a new year's resolution that i will keep if elected president. if you do not end your greed, we will end it for you.

we will no longer tolerate an economy and a political system that has been rigged by wall street to benefit the wealthiest americans in this country at the expense of everyone else.

while president obama deserves credit for improving this economy after the wall street crash, the reality is that a lot of unfinished business remains to be done.

our goal must be to create a financial system and an economy that works for all americans, not just a handful of billionaires

ending "too big to fail"

that means we have got to end, once and for all, the scheme that is nothing more than a free insurance policy for wall street, the policy of "too big to fail."

we need a banking system that is part of the productive economy — making loans at affordable rates to small- and medium-sized businesses so that we create decent-paying jobs. wall street cannot continue to be an island unto itself, gambling trillions in risky financial instruments, making huge profits and assured that, if their schemes fail, the taxpayers will be there to bail them out.

in 2008, the taxpayers of this country bailed out wall street because we were told they were "too big to fail." yet, today, 3 out of the 4 largest financial institutions (jp morgan chase, bank of america and wells fargo) are nearly 80 percent bigger than before we bailed them out. incredibly, the six largest banks in this country issue more than two-thirds of all credit cards and more than 35 percent of all mortgages. they control more than 95 percent of all financial derivatives and hold more than 40 percent of all bank deposits. their assets are equivalent to nearly 60 percent of our gdp. enough is enough.

if a bank is too big to fail, it is too big to exist. when it comes to wall street reform that must be our bottom line. this is true not just from a risk perspective and the fear of another bailout. it is also true from the reality that a handful of huge financial institutions simply have too much economic and political power over this country.

if teddy roosevelt, the republican trust-buster, were alive today, he would say "break 'em up." and he would be right.

and, here's how i will accomplish that.

within the first 100 days of my administration, i will require the secretary of the treasury department to establish a "too-big-to fail" list of commercial banks, shadow banks and insurance companies whose failure would pose a catastrophic risk to the united states economy without a taxpayer bailout.

within one year, my administration will break these institutions up so that they no longer pose a grave threat to the economy as authorized under section 121 of the dodd-frank act.

and, i will fight to reinstate a 21st century glass-steagall act to clearly separate commercial banking, investment banking and insurance services. let's be clear: this legislation, introduced by my colleague senator elizabeth warren, aims at the heart of the shadow banking system.

in my view, senator warren, is right. dodd-frank should have broken up citigroup and other "too- big-to-fail" banks into pieces. and that's exactly what we need to do. and that's what i commit to do as president.

now, my opponent, secretary clinton says that glass-steagall would not have prevented the financial crisis because shadow banks like aig and lehman brothers, not big commercial banks, were the real culprits.

secretary clinton is wrong.

shadow banks did gamble recklessly, but where did that money come from? it came from the federally-insured bank deposits of big commercial banks — something that would have been banned under the glass-steagall act.

let's not forget: president franklin roosevelt signed this bill into law precisely to prevent wall street speculators from causing another great depression. and, it worked for more than five decades until wall street watered it down under president reagan and killed it under president clinton.

and, let's not kid ourselves. the federal reserve and the treasury department didn't just bail out shadow banks. as a result of an amendment that i offered to audit the emergency lending activities of the federal reserve during the financial crisis, we learned that the fed provided more than $16 trillion in short-term, low-interest loans to every major financial institution in the country including citigroup, jp morgan chase, bank of america, wells fargo, not to mention large corporations, foreign banks, and foreign central banks throughout the world.

secretary clinton says we just need to impose a few more fees and regulations on the financial industry. i disagree.

as former secretary of labor robert reich has said and i quote: "giant wall street banks continue to threaten the wellbeing of millions of americans, but what to do? bernie sanders says break them up and resurrect the glass-steagall act that once separated investment from commercial banking. hillary clinton says charge them a bit more and oversee them more carefully … hillary clinton's proposals would only invite more dilution and finagle. the only way to contain the street's excesses is with reforms so big, bold, and public they can't be watered down — busting up the biggest banks and resurrecting glass-steagall."

secretary reich is right. real wall street reform means breaking up the big banks and re-establishing firewalls that separates risk taking from traditional banking.

my opponent says that, as a senator, she told bankers to "cut it out" and end their destructive behavior. but, in my view, establishment politicians are the ones who need to "cut it out." the reality is that congress doesn't regulate wall street. wall street, its lobbyists and their billions of dollars regulate congress. we must change that reality, and as president i will.

ending too-big-to-jail

it is no secret that millions of americans have become disillusioned with our political process. they don't vote. they don't believe much of what comes out of washington. they don't think anyone is there representing their interests. in my view, one of the reasons for that deep disillusionment is the widespread understanding that our criminal justice system is broken and grossly unfair — and that we do not have equal justice under the law. the average american sees kids being arrested and sometimes even jailed for possessing marijuana or other minor crimes. but when it comes to wall street executives, some of the wealthiest and most powerful people in this country, whose illegal behavior caused pain and suffering for millions — somehow nothing happens to them. no police record. no jail time. no justice.

we live in a country today that has an economy that is rigged, a campaign finance system which is corrupt and a criminal justice system which, too often, does not dispense justice.

not one major wall street executive has been prosecuted for causing the near collapse of our entire economy.

that will change under my administration. "equal justice under law" will not just be words engraved on the entrance of the supreme court. it will be the standard that applies to wall street and all americans.

the business model on wall street is fraud

it seems like almost every few weeks we read about one giant financial institution after another being fined or reaching settlements for their reckless, unfair and deceptive activities.

some people believe that this is an aberration: that we have an honest financial system in which, every now and then, major financial institutions do something wrong and get caught. in my view, the evidence suggests that would be an incorrect analysis.

the reality is that fraud is the business model on wall street. it is not the exception to the rule. it is the rule. and in a weak regulatory climate the likelihood is that wall street gets away with a lot more illegal behavior than we know of.

how many times have we heard the myth that what wall street did may have been wrong but it wasn't illegal?

let me help shatter that myth today.

since 2009, major financial institutions in this country have been fined $204 billion. $204 billion. and that takes place in a weak regulatory climate.

here are just a few examples of when major banks were caught doing illegal activity.

in august 2014, bank of america settled a case with the department of justice for more than $16 billion on charges that the bank misled investors about the riskiness of mortgage-backed securities it sold in the run-up to the crisis.

in november of 2013, jp morgan settled a case for $13 billion with the department of justice and the federal housing finance agency over charges the bank knowingly sold securities made up of low-quality mortgages to fannie mae and freddie mac.

in june of 2014, bnp paribas was sentenced to five years' probation and was ordered to pay $8.9 billion in penalties by a u.s. district judge in manhattan after this bank pled guilty to charges of violating sanctions by conducting business in sudan, iran and cuba.

let me read you a few headlines and you tell me how it makes sense that not one executive was prosecuted for fraud.

cnn headline, may 20, 2015: "5 big banks pay $5.4 billion for rigging currencies." those banks include jpmorgan chase and citigroup.
headline from the international business times (february 24, 2015): "big banks under investigation for allegedly fixing precious metals prices." the banks under investigation included goldman sachs and jpmorgan chase.
headline from the real news network (november 26, 2013): "documents in jpmorgan settlement reveal how every large bank in the u.s. has committed mortgage fraud."
headline from the washington post (march 14, 2014): "in lawsuit, fdic accuses 16 big banks of fraud, conspiracy," which included bank of america, citigroup and jp morgan chase.
headline from the guardian (april 2, 2011): "how a big u.s. bank laundered billions from mexico's murderous drug gangs." this article talks about how wachovia (which was acquired by wells fargo) aided mexican drug cartels in transferring billions of dollars in illegal drug money. here is what the federal prosecutor (jeffrey sloman) said about this: "wachovia's blatant disregard for our banking laws gave international cocaine cartels a virtual carte blanche to finance their operations."
yet, the total fine for this offense was less than 2% of the bank's $12.3 billion profit for 2009 and no one went to jail. no one went to jail.

and, if that's not bad enough, here's another one.

headline: the wall street journal, february 9, 2011: "j.p. morgan apologizes for military foreclosures." here is a case where jp morgan chase, the largest bank in america, wrecked the finances of 4,000 military families in violation of the civil service members relief act, yet no one went to jail.
and, when i say that the business model of wall street is fraud that is not just bernie sanders talking. that is what financial executives told the university of notre dame in a study on the ethics of the financial services industry last year.

according to this study, 51 percent of wall street executives making more than $500,000 a year found it likely that their competitors have engaged in unethical or illegal activity in order to gain an edge in the market.

more than one-third of financial executives have either witnessed or have firsthand knowledge of wrongdoing in the workplace.

nearly one in five financial service professionals believe they must engage in illegal or unethical activity to be successful.

twenty-five percent of financial executives have signed or been asked to sign a confidentiality agreement that would prohibit reporting illegal or unethical activities to the authorities.

here's what one banker from barclays said in 2010, when he was caught trying to price-fix the $5 trillion-per-day currency market: "if you ain't cheating, you ain't trying."

here's what an analyst from standard & poors said in 2008, "let's hope we are all wealthy and retired by the time this house of cards falters."

this country can no longer afford to tolerate the culture of fraud and corruption on wall street.

under my administration, wall street ceos will no longer receive a get-out-of jail free card. big banks will not be too big to fail. big bankers will not be too big to jail.

as president, i will nominate and appoint people with a track record of standing up to power, rather than those who have made millions defending wall street ceos. goldman sachs and other wall street banks will not be represented in my administration.

tax on wall street speculation

and, if we are serious about reforming our financial system, we have got to establish a tax on wall street speculators. we have got to discourage reckless gambling on wall street and encourage productive investments in the job-creating economy.

we will use the revenue from this tax to make public colleges and universities tuition free. during the financial crisis, the middle class of this country bailed out wall street. now, it's wall street's turn to help the middle class.

reforming credit rating agencies

we cannot have a safe and sound financial system if we cannot trust the credit agencies to accurately rate financial products. and, the only way we can restore that trust is to make sure credit rating agencies cannot make a profit from wall street.

investors would not have bought the risky mortgage backed derivatives that led to the great recession if credit agencies did not give these worthless financial products triple-a ratings — ratings that they knew were bogus.

and, the reason these risky financial schemes were given such favorable ratings is simple. wall street paid for them.

under my administration, we will turn for-profit credit rating agencies into non-profit institutions, independent from wall street. no longer will wall street be able to pick and choose which credit agency will rate their products.

cap credit card interest rates and atm fees

if we are going to create a financial system that works for all americans, we have got to stop financial institutions from ripping off the american people by charging sky-high interest rates and outrageous fees.

in my view, it is unacceptable that americans are paying a $4 or $5 fee each time they go to the atm.

it is unacceptable that millions of americans are paying credit card interest rates of 20 or 30 percent.

the bible has a term for this practice. it's called usury. and in the divine comedy, dante reserved a special place in the seventh circle of hell for those who charged people usurious interest rates.

today, we don't need the hellfire and the pitch forks, we don't need the rivers of boiling blood, but we do need a national usury law.

today, we need to cap interest rates on credit cards and consumer loans at 15 percent.

in 1980, congress passed legislation to require credit unions to cap interest rates on their loans at no more than 15 percent. and, that law has worked well. unlike big banks, credit unions did not receive a huge bailout from the taxpayers of this country. it is time to extend this cap to every lender in america.

we must also cap atm fees at $2.00. people should not have to pay a 10 percent fee for withdrawing $40 of their own money out of an atm.

big banks need to stop acting like loan sharks and start acting like responsible lenders.

allow post offices to offer banking services

we also need to give americans affordable banking options.

the reality is that, unbelievably, millions of low-income americans live in communities where there are no normal banking services. today, if you live in a low-income community and you need to cash a check or get a loan to pay for a car repair or a medical emergency, where do you go?

you go to a payday lender who could charge an interest rate of over 300 percent and trap you into a vicious cycle of debt. that is unacceptable.

we need to stop payday lenders from ripping off millions of americans. post offices exist in almost every community in our country. one important way to provide decent banking opportunities for low income communities is to allow the u.s. postal service to engage in basic banking services, and that's what i will fight for.

reforming the federal reserve

further, we need to structurally reform the federal reserve to make it a more democratic institution responsive to the needs of ordinary americans, not just the billionaires on wall street.

when wall street was on the verge of collapse, the federal reserve acted with a fierce sense of urgency to save the financial system. we need the fed to act with the same boldness to combat unemployment and low wages.

in my view, it is unacceptable that the federal reserve has been hijacked by the very bankers it is in charge of regulating. i think the american people would be shocked to learn that jamie dimon, the ceo of jp morgan chase, served on the board of the new york fed at the same time that his bank received a $391 billion bailout from the federal reserve. that is a clear conflict of interest that i would ban as president. when i am elected, the foxes will no longer be guarding the henhouse at the fed. under my administration, banking industry executives will no longer be allowed to serve on the fed's boards and handpick its members and staff.

further, the fed should stop paying financial institutions interest to keep money out of the economy and parked at the fed. incredibly, the excess reserves of financial institutions that are sitting in the federal reserve has grown from less than $2 billion in 2008 to $2.4 trillion today. that is absurd.

instead of paying banks interest on these reserves, the fed should charge them a fee that could be used to provide affordable loans to small businesses to create hundreds of thousands of jobs.

conclusion

finally, let me tell you what no other candidate will tell you. no president, not bernie sanders or anyone else, can effectively address the economic crises facing the working families of this country alone. the truth is that wall street, corporate america, the corporate media and wealthy campaign donors are just too powerful.

what this campaign is about is building a political movement which revitalizes american democracy, which brings millions of people together — black and white, latino, asian-american, native american — young and old, men and women, gay and straight, native born and immigrant, people of all religions.

yes. wall street has enormous economic and political power. yes. wall street makes huge campaign contributions, they have thousands of lobbyists and they provide very generous speaking fees to those who go before them.

yes. they have an endless supply of money. but we have something they don't have. and that is that when millions of working families stand together, demanding fundamental changes in our financial system, we have the power to bring about that change.

yes, we can make our economy work for all americans, not just a handful of wealthy speculators. and, now more than ever, that is exactly what we must do.

and so my message to you today is straightforward: if elected president, i will rein in wall street so they can't crash our economy again.

will they like me? no. will they begin to play by the rules if i'm president? you better believe it.

thank you and i look forward to working with the most powerful force in our great nation, not the barons of wall street but the people our government was created to serve. whoa, thank you. thank you so much for -- love you, too!

thank you so much for coming out this evening. this is a wonderful, wonderful turnout.

let me also thank my dear friend bill mckibben. i trust all of you know that bill is not only an outstanding writer, he really is a great writer, and not only the subject matter that he deals with so thoroughly, he really writes very, very well, but bill is also not just one of the leaders of the movement to combat climate change in this country, bill is one of the international leaders.

he founded, as you know, 350.org, which has played a role all over the world in bringing people to stand up in the fight to save our planet.

and when bill talks about organizing at the grassroots level, there is nobody i know who does it better than he does. about a year- and-a-half ago, i think it was, we were in new york city, 400,000 people, a lot of young people, a lot of people of color, people from all over the world were marching to demand that congress and governments all over this planet recognize the seriousness of what we are going through now and move aggressively to transform our energy system away from fossil fuel to energy efficiency and sustainable energy.

so when you hear from bill, you're hearing from a guy who is an international leader on one of the most important issues facing our country. and i'm going to get into that in a moment.

let me say a few words about our campaign, before i get into the thrust of my remarks. we began this campaign about nine months ago. and when we began we had no money, no organization and, frankly, my name recognition around much of the country was not very, very high. and a lot of the media pundits were saying, well, you know, bernie sanders combs his hair outstandingly.

and i want some recognition. i just got a haircut here. that's worth something, you know?

my wife said enough is enough, you gotta get a haircut, so we did that.  and you know, and i was considered, this campaign was considered to be a fringe candidacy. interesting, but not significant. well, i think a lot has happened in nine months.

with your help, we've got a real shot to win here in new hampshire. we're are doing better and better in iowa. a recent poll, actually a poll a few hours old, had us ahead in iowa.

and i think it is fair to say that we have a lot of momentum. in my view, we will win in iowa, we will win in new hampshire if -- and here is the big if -- if there is a large voter turnout, if working people and young people and older people decide that it is important enough to make a statement, and that's what your state does, that's what bill was saying, you're making a statement that will be heard not only all across our country, it will be heard all over the world.

and the statement is that we have had enough of establishment politics, establishment economics, we need to move in a new and bold direction.

now, when you come within a week or two weeks or two-and-a-half weeks of an election, suddenly you start hearing a lot of strange things being said. and one of the things that my opponent, secretary clinton, is saying is that bernie sanders is unelectable, he just cannot defeat a republican candidate in a general election.

so it gives me some pleasure to give you some facts that suggest that that might not just be the case.

here in your state of new hampshire, a state where people know hillary clinton very well, she ran here in 2008, she's running hard now, a state where people know me well, when we were compared in a recent poll from cnn and wmur just the other day, in terms of how well we would do against republican candidates, this is the result from new hampshire. secretary clinton loses to marco rubio by one point; we beat him by 18 points.

secretary clinton and governor kasich are tied; we beat kasich by 21 points.

and here is my favorite.  because it deals with my good, good friend donald trump. secretary clinton defeats mr. trump by nine points, we beat him by 23 points.

all of which -- all of which -- reaffirms my love for the smart people in the state of new hampshire. but it's not just new hampshire. the results are not quite as strong, but they're also strong in iowa where we do a lot better than secretary clinton against republicans, in polls, and also nationally. there was an nbc/wall street journal poll that came out the other day. secretary clinton defeated trump by 10 points; we defeated him by 15 points.

and the main -- even more importantly than polls, polls go up and down, but even more importantly is the thrust of our campaign. here is a political fact, and the fact is that republicans win national elections when people are demoralized and they don't come out and vote.

and last year in the midterm election, republicans won a landslide victory, they won a huge victory all over this country because 63 percent of the american people didn't vote, 80 percent of young people didn't vote.

and what is going on in this campaign, i think any objective observer would note, that the campaign that has the excitement, that has the energy, that's bringing working people, that's bringing young people in, a campaign that has spoken to 450,000 already, all over america, that has spoken to over 27,000 people in meetings like this in new hampshire, that our campaign is the campaign of excitement, energy, momentum, which will result in a large voter turnout, which mean victories for the democrats from the top on down.

and let me also say this. when we began this campaign, as i said, we didn't have money and we didn't have an organization, name recognition not all that high. and one of the problems that we had to face right away is the fact that, as all of you know, to run for president of the united states, sad but true, you need to raise an unbelievable amount of money.

and what the pundits and the experts were saying, well, the only way that a candidate in this day and age with this disastrous citizens united decision, the only way that a candidate can raise the kinds of money you need is to set up a super pac. and the truth is that my democratic opponents set up super pacs and that almost all republican opponents set up super pacs.

but to my mind, as somebody who does not represent the billionaire class, does not represent corporate america, i decided that i was not going to establish a super pac, i was not going to ask them for millions and millions of dollars in money.

but then, you know, that's a very lovely statement, but that still doesn't bring you any money. so how do you do it?

well, what we did is kind of an old-fashioned way. we reached out to the middle class and working families of this country. and what happened is -- and this i would not have in a million years dreamed that we could do. in the last nine months, we have received 2 1/2 million individual contributions.

that is more than any candidate in the history of the united states of america, up to this point in a campaign.

and at a time when candidates are so proudly leaving rooms with millionaires and coming out with 5 million or 10 million bucks, our average contribution is $27.

so what all of that means is we have already accomplished something enormous, and that is we have shown the american people that despite this disastrous citizens united supreme court decision, despite all of the super pacs, one can still run a strong and, i believe, winning campaign based on the support from working families and the middle class. and i'm very proud of that.

and today in new hampshire, we have many thousands of volunteers, and we have a wonderful, wonderful organization. and with your help, if we can get a good voter turnout on february 9th, i believe we can win this state and i ask for your help to make that happen.

now, one of the reasons that i think our campaign is doing well is because we are treating the american people as if they were intelligent human beings.

now, that's a radical idea for a politician. you know, when we we are often seen on tv in six-second sound bites or when the media will tell you what the most important issues are, we have chosen to go a different direction. and what we have tried to say is the most important issues facing us is not what appears on television tomorrow, the most important issues are the issues that you are struggling with today in terms of your lives, your children's lives and your parent's lives. those are the issues that we have got to address, whether the media finds them interest or exciting or not.

now, what do i mean by that? i'll just give you a few examples, ok?

a couple of weeks ago i was in nevada. a woman, early 30s, i think, came up to me. she has a 5-year-old child and she said, bernie, i am trying to make it with a 5-year-old kid, earning $10.45 an hour and paying off my student debt. and tears started running down her cheeks. i don't know if i can do that, i don't know what happens to my child.

in my state, and it's no different here in new hampshire, we have many, many seniors who are trying to get by on 11, 12, $13,000 a year social security. and if you just do the arithmetic, you can't get by on 11, $12,000 social security. and some of those seniors are literally cutting up their medicine, their pills in half, which is not a good thing to do, but they don't have the money they need to buy the medicine that they require.

i fought very hard to expand the meals on wheels program; republicans resisted. but all over this country, there are seniors who are on waiting lists trying to get meals on wheels because they're having a hard time eating at least one decent, nutritious meal a day.

and what a disgrace that is. and then i go all over the country and i talk to people. young people stand up. i spoke to a kid the other day. senator, i will be graduating college very shortly. i'm going to be $60,000 in debt, having a hard time finding a job. i'm supposed to pay back $1,200 a month. i have no clue as to how i can do that.

saw another young man, late 20s, two kids, married. he's working in sustainable energy. he's devoted to the environment. he says he's paying 53 percent of his limited income on student debts.

talk to moms and dads all over new hampshire, all over vermont, all over this country, who desperately want quality, affordable child care for the little ones, can't find that.

talk to 55-year-old workers who are scared to death about going to work someday and finding the employer say, joe, thanks for working for us for 30 years, but we can hire somebody at half your age for half the wages.

talk to the kids graduating college and have a hard time finding jobs commensurate with their education.

talk to people, and i do all of the time, who are working two or three jobs, trying to cobble together some income and some health care.

talk to husbands and wives whose marriages are being stressed out and strained because people are working so hard and they don't have enough time to spend with their kids.

now, the truth is, although my republican friends deny it, our economy today is obviously today in a lot better shape than it was when george w. bush left office.

when bush left office, we were hemorrhaging 800,000 jobs a month. that is unbelievable. our deficit was a record-breaking $1.4 trillion. and oh, by the way, the world's financial system was on the verge of collapse. other than that, we were in really good shape. and these people have the nerve to attack barack obama.

so we have made progress. we've cut the deficit by more than two-thirds. the world's financial system is now, at this moment anyhow, not on the verge of collapse. and we are growing jobs rather than hemorrhaging jobs.

but having said that, what we must also be honest about and that is is to acknowledge that under republican administrations and democratic administrations for the last 40 years, the great middle class of this country, the middle class that was once the envy of the entire world, has been disappearing -- has been disappearing.

if you are a male worker in the middle of the american economy, half the people on top, half the people below, you are earning today in inflation-adjusted-for dollars 700 bucks a year less than you made 41 years ago. productivity expanding, technology exploding, and yet you're making $700 less than you made 41 years ago.

if you are a woman, you are making a thousand dollars less in adjusted income than you made in 2007. well, that's the reality.

now, the reality is also and why people are so angry is they're working harder and harder, many of them are slipping into poverty, everyone is worried about the future of their kids -- which, by the way, if we do not get our act together, the kids, our kids, will be the first generation in modern american history to have a lower standard of living than we do.

so what people are asking is, what's going on? technology exploding, global economy, worker productivity going on, but the middle class for 40 years has been in decline and more and more people living in poverty.

well, i would suggest to you that a lot of why that is happening has to do with the fact that we have seen in the last 30 years a massive transfer of wealth from the middle class and working families of our country to the top one-tenth of 1 percent, trillions of dollars that were owned by the middle class are now gone while the top one- tenth of 1 percent has seen a doubling of the percentage of wealth that they own.

and to my mind, together, as we try to turn this country around, one of the areas that we absolutely must focus on is the grotesque level of income and wealth inequality we are experiencing today.

now, let me just blur you for a moment with a few facts, but i think it's important for you to know it. they don't usually get reported in the media, but it's important that people know it. and that is, in america today the top one-tenth of 1 percent, not 1 percent, one-tenth of 1 percent, owns almost as much wealth as the bottom 90 percent. got that?

today in america, the wealthiest 20 people -- 20 people -- that's the front row here, not these guys, though...

...the wealthiest 20 people in america own more wealth than the bottom half of america, 150 million people.

today in america, one family, the walton family that owns walmart, one family owns more wealth than the bottom 40 percent of the american people.

and by the way, when i walk about the walton family, let me mention to you that i know that you hear a lot from politicians about welfare reform. right? we hear a lot about welfare reform, people ripping off the welfare system. so let me tell you who the major welfare recipient family in america is. it's not some poor family down the road. the major welfare recipient in america is the walton family, the wealthiest family in america. and they are the major recipient because you as taxpayers are paying taxes for medicaid and food stamps and affordable housing that walmart employees need because the walton family is not paying them a living wage.

so when we talk about a rigged economy, an economy where the rich get much richer while almost everybody else gets poorer, it seems a little bit absurd that the middle class has got to subsidize the wealthiest family in this country.

so i say to the walton family, the owners of walmart, get off of welfare, start paying your workers a decent wage.

that's wealth. when we talk about income, despite the fact that so many of our people are working such long hours, turns out that 58 percent of all new income generated goes to the top 1 percent.

so you ready for a radical idea? why not. what about creating an economy that works for working families and not for the 1 percent?  but when we talk about the economy, it is not only the grotesque level, and it is a grotesque level of income and wealth inequality, it is also about jobs.

now, every month, the federal government issues a set of reports on unemployment. the report most of you see on the front pages of the paper is the official unemployment report, which is now about about 5 percent. what the official unemployment report does not include are those people who have given up looking for work and those people who are working part time who want to work full time. if you add that together, we're close to 10 percent unemployment.

and here's something that is almost never discussed at all, but it is a huge and tragic issue, and that is the problem of youth unemployment -- youth unemployment. a couple of months ago, i asked some economists to do a study for me. and i said, tell me what real youth unemployment is in this country for kids who graduate high school, not drop out.

and this is what they said: kids who are white, 33 percent unemployed or underemployed, 33 percent; latino 36 percent; african american 51 percent.

now, if anybody in this room thinks there is not a connection between that outrageously high level of youth unemployment and the fact that we have more people in jail than any other country on earth, i believe you would be mistaken.

today in america, we have 2.2 million people in jail. we spend $80 billion a year locking them up. so here's my second radical idea of the evening, and that is maybe it makes a lot more sense for us to be investing in education and jobs rather than jails and incarceration.

our goal should be to have the best-educated population on earth, not more people in jail than any other country on earth.

and when we ask ourselves why it is that people are working such long hours, why? you know, it's a funny story, but it's not really so funny. if you remember the history books that we read when we were in school, there were pictures of workers a hundred years ago, marching down streets, holding up big placards. and you know what those placards were saying? they were saying we want the 40-hour work week.

well, a hundred years have come and gone and we still want the 40-hour work week.

turns out that we in the united states work the longest hours. i don't know if you know this. we work the longest hours of any people in the industrialized world. the japanese are very hard workers, we work longer hours than they do. and one of the obvious reasons as to why people work such long hours is that wages in this country are too damn low.

so let me be very clear. the federal minimum wage today of $7.25 an hour is a starvation wage. we need to raise the minimum wage to a living wage, 15 bucks an hour over the next few years.

and when we talk about equitable wages, i hope that every man in this room will stand with the women in the fight for pay equity for women workers.

there is no rational economic reason why women should be making 79 cents on the dollar compared to men. that is just old-fashioned sexism, and together we are going to change that.

now, in new hampshire, for better or for worse, you see a whole lot of politicians trotting through your state. and if they are republicans, you may hear them talking about family values. they just love families. stay up nights worrying about families.

especially if they're very wealthy families who can contribute to their campaigns.

but you all know what they mean by family values, which is not a laughing matter. what they mean is that no woman in this room, in this state, in this country, should have the right to control her own body. i disagree.

what they mean by family values is that we should defund planned parenthood. i think we should expanding funding for planned parenthood.

and what they mean by family values is that our gay brothers and sisters should not have the right to get married. i disagree.

now, my wife, jane, and i have been married for 27 years, we have four great kids. you saw my son levi. we've got seven beautiful grandchildren, three of them here in new hampshire, and we're very proud of our family. and we believe very strongly in family values.

but when i talk about family values, my values are a little bit different than the republicans. and when i talk about family values, i talk about ending the international embarrassment of the united states of america being the only major country on earth that does not provide paid family and medical leave.

now, the good and beautiful news is that here in new hampshire today and in vermont and all over this country, women are giving birth and for those of you who are parents you know what an extraordinary day that is. and it's a pretty big day for the baby as well.

but here's the story. if that woman who gives birth today is a working-class woman or a lower-income woman, the likelihood is that she will have to basically give up her baby, lose contact with her baby, separate from her baby and go back to work in a week or two in order to earn enough money to take care of her family. that is not a family value. that is the opposite of what a family value is.

virtually every government on earth, and not only wealthy nations, developing nations, poor nations, understand that mom and dad should have the right to stay home with their newborn baby in what amounts to the most important weeks and months of that human being's life.

but it's not just childbirth. all of you know that kids get sick. it happens once in a while. and mom or dad should have the right to stay home with their child when their child is sick. parents get sick. sons and daughters should have the right to tend to their mothers or fathers.

that is why i am strongly supporting and will make happen as president three months of paid family and medical leave for every family in america.

that is not a radical idea. my goodness, every other country on earth could do it, or virtually every country. i think we can as well.

and when we talk about the economy, obviously we're talking about job creation. and when real unemployment is 10 percent and youth unemployment is higher than that, in my view, we need a massive federal jobs program to put our people back to work.

we should be hiring teachers, not firing teachers.

when we have a dysfunctional child care and pre-k system, which for many families is unaffordable and where child care workers are earning minimum wage or a little bit more, we need to create hundreds of thousands of jobs for well-trained, well-paid child care workers in this country.

and when we have an infrastructure, roads, bridges, water systems, wastewater plants, and i'm not just talking about flint, michigan, i'm talking about municipalities all over this country where water systems are leaking and in bad trouble, we need to rebuild our rail system to catch up with europe and japan and even china.

we can create 13 million decent-paying jobs rebuilding our infrastructure with a $1 trillion investment. and i intend to make that investment.

well, people say that's a great idea, but it's an expensive proposition, even in washington. a trillion dollars is a lot of money. where are you going to get the money? i will tell you where we get the money. we are going to end this outrageous tax loophole that allows major, billion-dollar, profitable corporations to stash their money in the cayman islands and other tax havens.

we are losing a hundred billion dollars a year. you have corporations that make billions of dollars in profit, not paying a nickel in a given year in federal income tax. that's wrong. we're going to change that. we are going to invest in our infrastructure, create millions of good-paying jobs.

and by the way, not only do we need to create millions of good- paying jobs, we need to stop the loss of millions of jobs through a disastrous trade policy that allows corporate america to shut down plants here and move to low-wage countries abroad.

when i talk about an economy that is rigged, when i talk about a campaign finance system that is corrupt, when i talk about a criminal justice system that is broken, it turns out that we see all of that in a recent story that was in the papers about a week ago. and here is the story that tells you how corrupt our economic and political and criminal justice system is.

about a week ago, it was announced that goldman sachs, one of the major financial institutions on wall street, was going to reach a settlement with the federal government for $5 billion -- $5 billion -- and they were reaching that settlement because they had sold subprime mortgage packages that were worthless and cheated investors. investors thought they were buying something that was worth something, but it was worthless and goldman sachs knew that.

now, over the last 30 years, goldman sachs has operated what we call a revolving door. a revolving door means that people leave wall street and corporate america, go into government, do the bidding of wall street and corporate america, and then go back to the private sector. in fact, in the last 30 years, goldman sachs has given this country two secretaries of the treasury, one under a republican administration, one under a democratic administration. that's how the system works. big money gets their people into government, works for big money.

and then it turns out that the guy who is head of goldman sachs, the financial institution that has paid $5 billion in settlement with the government, is a billionaire who a couple of years ago went to the congress and he said, you know what, congress, you have got to cut social security, you've got to cut medicare, you've got to cut medicaid, we can't afford to sustain these programs. this is coming from a billionaire whose company now paid a $5 billion fine for ripping off the american people.

now, when we talk about why the american people are angry and why they are increasingly alienated from the political process, it has a lot to do with the fact that there are kids in new hampshire, kids in vermont, who get arrested for possessing marijuana and they get...

...and they get a police record. and you know what? when you get a police record, sometimes it's a little bit hard to go out and get a job. and yet, when you are the ceo or a major executive of a multi-multi-billion-dollar financial institution which helped crash the economy because of their greed, recklessness and illegal behavior, helped create a situation in which millions of people lost their homes, their life savings, their jobs, when you are that person, somehow you do not get a police record. that is wrong. that has got to change.

and by the way, to make a bad situation even worse, this particular company, goldman sachs, spends huge amounts of money on campaign contributions and on speakers fees to unnamed candidates.

but that's how the system works. that is how the system works. that's what power is about. that's why the 1 percent gets richer and while everybody else gets poorer.

and when i talk about a political revolution and when i talk about bringing millions of people into the political process, what our job is to end that type of corruption and power-mongering and to create a government that works for all of us, not just a handful of people.

and speaking about campaign contributions, it turns out ironically that today is the sixth anniversary of one of the worst supreme court decisions in the history of this country, and that is the citizens united decision.

and what citizens united did was to say to the very wealthiest people in this country you already own much of the economy, now we're going to give you an opportunity to purchase the united states government, and that is precisely what they are trying to do.

you have one family and a few of their friends, the koch brothers, second-wealthiest family in america, and they're very, very nervous and unhappy. you see, they're trying to catch up to the waltons and they're only in second place, so they're working really hard and figure they could become even richer if they can elect candidates who hold their views, which is not just to cut social security or medicare, it is to end social security and medicare and medicaid and the environmental protection agency. that's a family that is spending $900 million on this campaign cycle.

now, when you've got one family, second-wealthiest in america, spending more money in a campaign than either the democratic party or the republican party, you're not looking at a democratic society, you're looking at an oligarchic form of society. and together, we are going to stop that.

and the reason, the reason that that issue is so important, is that it touches on every other issue. you name the issue. and if people are elected to office to represent the wealthy and the powerful, the needs of the middle class and working families, the needs of women, the needs of children, the needs of the environment, will not be addressed.

and then there are -- so let me conclude that by telling you, and here's a promise, that no nominee of mine to the united states supreme court will get that nomination unless he or she is crystal clear that they will vote to overturn citizens united.

everybody in this room knows we live in a highly competitive, global economy. and if we're going to succeed, we need the best- educated workforce in the world. there was once a time when we did. that time is not anymore.

now, it seems to me to be totally absurd, beyond comprehension, that when we need the intellectual capabilities of all of our people, we have hundreds of thousands of young americans who are able, who are qualified, but who cannot get to college for one reason and one reason alone, and that is their families lack the money.

that is why i believe that in the year 2016 we must make public colleges and universities tuition free.

and i say that not just for the obvious reason, that it means that bright young people will be able to go to college and people will not leave school deeply in debt, but there is a more profound reason. i grew up in a family that never had a lot of money. and my dad came from poland, he had dropped out of high school, my mom graduated high school.

but the people, like every milieu, the people you associate with, your family associates with, in my family and other families, you associate with people with similar economic backgrounds. and the people that we associated with just did not have college education. and that's true all over america. there are kids who don't know anybody who went to college.

if we can make public colleges and universities tuition free, if every parent in this country, every teacher in this country, every child in this country, kids who in the sixth grade, the eighth grade, understand that if they do their schoolwork seriously, if they pay attention in school, that they will be able to get a college education regardless of the income of their families. that is revolutionary.

and when we talk about our responsibilities as adults, as inhabitants of this earth, as parents, as grandparents, it seems to me that we have a moral responsibility to make sure that the planet that we leave our kids and grandchildren is healthy and habitable.

i sit on the senate environmental committee and on the senate energy committee. and in that capacity, i've met scientists all over our country, all over the world. and what they say is very clear: climate change is real, it is caused by human activity, it is already causing major problems in our country and around the world.

and what they also say, and this is scary stuff, is that if we do not get our act together, this planet earth, our only planet, could become five to 10 degrees warmer by the end of this century. and what that means is more drought, more floods, more extreme weather disturbances, more acidification of the ocean, more rising sea levels, more international conflicts as peoples fight for limited natural resources.

if elected president, i will lead our country into working with russia, china, india, countries all over the world, to take on the fossil fuel industry, transform our energy system away from fossil fuel to energy efficiency and sustainable energy.

and let me connect some dots here and show you how everything is related to everything else. today we have a major political party, it's called the republican party, where not one of their candidates for president, and they have many candidates for president, not one of them has stood up and said, you know, i've read the literature, i've talked to the scientists, we've got a problem, climate change is real, we better do something about it. not one. and in the congress, there are very, very few of them. there are some, but very few who are prepared to talk the truth about climate change.

now, some may say, well, you know, republicans are dumb or something like that. but that's not the case. some of you may think it's the case, but it's not the case. not here.

i'm on a lot of committees and i serve with republicans and we discuss issues, like cancer and alzheimer's disease and heart disease, on the health committee and so forth, and they ask the same rational questions anybody else would ask. they don't go around attacking cancer researcher or alzheimer's researchers.

but on this issue, on this issue things are very, very different. and the reason for that is a corrupt campaign finance system which tells the republicans that if one of them were to stand up and say, you know what, climate change is real, we've got to do something about that, on that day they would lose their funding from the koch brothers and the fossil fuel industry.

and that is just one example of many as to why we need campaign finance reform.

when we talk about america and when we talk about the future of our country, what i am trying to do in this campaign is to get people to think big, not small. in other words, if we were an impoverished country, we would have one type of discussion. but we are the wealthiest country in the history of the world. and that calls for a different type of discussion.

today there is one major country on earth -- one -- the country that you live in, that does not guarantee health care to every man, woman and child as a right.

now, i have been criticized for believing that health care is a right, not a privilege. people want to criticize me, that's fine, that is what i believe.

now, i am a member of the senate health, education, labor and pension committee, and in that capacity spent an enormous amount of time working on the affordable care act. and in my view, the affordable care act has done some very, very important things. it has ended the private insurance company obscenity of preexisting conditions.

and in 20 years from now or 50 years from now, people will look back and they'll say i really cannot believe you had a system where insurance could tell somebody, oh, you had breast cancer five years ago, we will provide you insurance, but not for breast cancer because it may recur. it's like saying i'm going to give you fire insurance, except if you have a fire.

you know, it is totally, totally insane. that's gone.

what we have also done through the aca is provided health insurance for some 17 million americans who otherwise would not have it. we have made it much fairer to women, who do not have to pay higher prices for insurance than men.

so there's a lot of good stuff in there. but let's also be clear. today, 29 million americans have no health insurance. many more are under-insured with high deductibles and co-payments. there are people in this room who have high deductibles.

anybody have a high deductible? would you mind telling us? anyone want to tell us what their deductible is? six thousand, $4,000, $10,000. ok.

whatever i do, they say i always feel like a vermont auctioneer, you know.

sorry to say, you won unless somebody can go higher than $10,000.

but what that means is that all over this country people do have insurance, but they have high deductibles and they have high co- payments. and what does that mean? it means in real world that people hesitate to go to the doctor when they're sick because they just don't have the money in their pocket.

and what that also means, and i've talked to a whole lot of doctors in vermont and all over this country, is sometimes people go into the doctor's office and they are really, really, really sick. and the doctor said, why didn't you come in here six months ago? and the person says, well, i didn't have any health insurance or maybe i had a high deductible and i couldn't afford it. sometimes those people do not make it. sometimes they end up in the hospital at great expense and at great suffering.

in my view, when we have a system which has 29 million people uninsured, more under-insured, when we pay the highest prices in the world for prescription drugs, which is a huge problem, when we end up spending almost three times more than the british spend, who provide health care to all of their people, 50 percent more than the french spend to provide health care to all their people, far more than our canadian neighbors spend who provide health care to all of their people, i think we need to move forward toward a medicare-for-all single-payer program.

and because medicare for all takes the private insurance companies out of the equation, and you all know their function is simply to make as much money as possible, when we'll be able to negotiate prices with the drug companies, we end up through a medicare-for-all program saving middle-class families thousands of dollars a year on their health care costs.

when we talk about issues in america, i know that all of you share with me our fatigue, our disgust, our anger at seeing videos on television of innocent people being shot to death by police officers.

and often, those people are african american or latino.

now, i was, as you all know, the mayor of burlington, vermont for eight years and in that capacity worked very, very hard with our police department. and in my view, the vast, vast majority of police officers in this country are honest, hardworking and are asked to do an enormously difficult job.

it is not easy being a police officer in the year 2016. but as is the case with any other public official, if a police officer breaks the law, that officer must be held accountable.

we need major reforms in our criminal justice system. we need to demilitarize local police departments.

we need to make police departments look like the diversity of the communities that they serve.

we need to take a hard look at the so-called war on drugs.

right now under the federal controlled substance act, marijuana is listed as a schedule i drug, right next to heroin. now, i don't have to tell the people of new hampshire about the horror of heroin. i don't have to tell the people of my state about the horror of heroin. it's a growing problem all over this country, a problem, by the way, in terms of opiate addiction and heroin addiction we have got to get a handle on.

which means that we need a revolution in mental health treatment in this country.

which means that when people need treatment for substance abuse, they get the treatment when they need it, not six months from when they need it.

and i am aware -- i just met a mother earlier today, lost, i believe, it was her daughter to drugs, and i know how serious that problem is in your state and how serious that problem is in my state.

but when you have marijuana next to heroin, i think that makes no sense to me at all.

and what i worry about is young people who get police records for possession of marijuana and then find it really hard to go out and get a job and get their lives together. and that is why i have introduced legislation to take marijuana out of the controlled substance act.

in america today, we have about 11 million undocumented people. many of them are being exploited and many of them are living in fear. i have talked to young latinos with tears running down their cheeks who worry that their parents could be deported or that they could be deported. as president, i will be as aggressive as i can in moving toward comprehensive immigration reform and a path toward citizenship.

now, we can have honest disagreements about any issue, including immigration reform. but what we should not be having in the year 2016, what we should not be having are candidates using racism and bigotry to attack...

the idea that somehow in the middle of the night we're going to pick up and round up 11 million people and throw them out of the country, the idea that people like donald trump are referring to latinos who come into this country as criminals and rapists is unacceptable -- unacceptable.

this campaign is about not just electing a president. it is about transforming america. bill mckibben mentioned to you a little while ago that it's not good enough to elect a president. what we need to do is to transform this country. and no president can do it alone. we need to be working together, we need to raise political consciousness, we need to have an understanding about what's going on in washington and politically in a way that we have not had for a very, very long time.

but here is the bottom line. the bottom line is that we are the wealthiest country in the history of the world. we are a country in the last 30 years that has seen a massive transfer of wealth away from the middle class to the top one-tenth of 1 percent. i believe that if we stand together, if we do not allow the donald trumps of the world to divide us up, if we are latino or if we are muslim, but if we stand together, there is nothing, nothing, nothing that we cannot accomplish.

please don't tell me that the united states of america, our great country, cannot guarantee health care to all people as a right.

don't tell me that we cannot make certain that all of our young people, regardless of the income of their families, are able to get a college education if they have the ability to do so.

and don't tell me that we can't train carpenters and plumbers and sheet metal workers who need that training to get good jobs.

don't tell me that we have to have more income and wealth inequality than any other major country on earth at the same time as we have more childhood poverty than any other country on earth.

don't tell me that we have to maintain a crumbling infrastructure. don't tell me that cannot address the fact that the wealthiest people in this country often pay an effective tax rate lower than what you pay.

when we stand together, there is nothing we cannot accomplish. that is what this campaign is about. and that is what a sanders administration is about.

thank you all very much!well, let me -- let begin by thanking you for inviting me to be with you today, thanking steve for his introduction, and most of all, thanking the steelworkers for their long, long support of what i've been trying to do throughout my entire political career.

i don't get any money and i don't want any money from corporations. never got a nickel.

don't want any money from the billionaire class.

but i am very grateful for the support that i've received from the steelworkers throughout my entire political career. thank you, guys, very, very much.

when i went to college, i studied some economics, but the real economic lesson that i learned was when i was a kid. i grew up in a home where my dad had come from poland at the age of 17 without a nickel in his pocket. never made much money. mother graduated high school. i lived in a three-and-a-half room rent-controlled apartment in brooklyn, new york, and we lived not poor, but our family lived on the financial stress as is the case with millions and millions of families in our country today.

so the major economics lesson that i have had in my life was not in high school and not in college, it was as a kid understanding what financial stress does to a family, understanding that every decision that is made has got to be thought about, whether you can afford to do this or whether you can afford to do that. and that, brothers and sisters, is a lesson i have never forgotten and i never will forget.

you know, one of the reasons i think our campaign is doing well is because we try to talk about the real issues impacting the american people. don't do necessarily do what the media wants us to do, but talk about real issues.

just turned out yesterday -- just happened. we were in iowa falls, had a few hundred people out to a meeting. and i kind of opened up the discussion to ask people what was going on in their lives, what was going on in their lives in terms of trying to make it on $12,000, $13,000 a year social security. and suddenly what was it like in their lives if you can't afford the prescription drugs that you need. and i want to thank the nurses, our sisters and brothers; are there nurses here?  who know these issues, who know what it means to be treating patients who can't afford prescriptions. and i opened it up, the discussion. one woman gets up there and says the medicine her family need -- i think it was her husband needed -- shot way up, shot way up to an outrageous price. and we all know that tomorrow, if you walk into a drug store to refill your prescription, the price could be double or triple than what was paid today. some of you have that experience, right? because the pharmaceutical industry is ripping off the american people.

so people talk -- we don't have a lot of money. the cost of prescription drugs goes way up. then another woman says -- you know, i was using the point -- making the point, millions of people in this country -- we don't talk about it terribly much -- trying to get by on $12,000, $13,000 a year on social security. you do the arithmetic. tell me how you pay for health care. tell me how you pay for prescription drugs. how do you heat your home. how do you buy the food you need on $12,000 or $13,000 a year? and the answer is exactly right, you don't. you don't.

and then we got republicans going around the country lying, as they occasionally do......and they're saying social security is going broke. we have to cut social security benefits.

 no!

 now, just stop and think about it. forget politics. tell me how somebody can go around the country when we know that millions of people -- seniors, disabled vets, people with disabilities, people who can't make it on $1,000, $13,000 a year, and they're talking about cutting social security benefits.

there's a thing that a lot of people have not heard of. it's called the chain cpi. anybody know what the chain cpi is? it's a fancy term from washington to cut social security benefits, and it argues, the theory behind it is that the colas, the cost-of-living adjustments that seniors are getting today are too generous. does anybody here know what seniors got in their cola last year?



 zero! too generous. got to cut it. anyhow, at iowa falls we heard from people who told us no, i'm not getting $12,000, $13,000 a year, i'm trying to live on $10,000 a year.

and then we heard another woman talk about what it means to have minimum wage jobs and how difficult it is to survive. and that is the reality for millions and millions of people in this country. it's a reality we don't talk enough about and it's certainly a reality that we are not effectively addressing.

now, here's the story. if we were a poor country -- and there are poor countries around the world -- you have a certain type of discussion. and you say, you know, it's unfortunate that we have to live in poverty, but that's who we are. we're a poor country. we can't have good education, we can't have good health care, we can't have decent paying jobs. we're a poor country.

but the truth is, as everybody here knows, the united states of america is not a poor country. we are the wealthiest country in the history of the world. but -- but most people don't know that because almost all of the new wealth and income is going to the top 1 percent.

and brothers and sisters, what a sanders administration is about is a very radical idea. you ready for a radical idea? we're going to create an economy that works for working families, not just billionaires.

and not only that. in the last 30 years, as everybody in this room knows, technology has exploded. almost every worker in america is more productive than he or she was 20 years, 30 years ago, right? you're producing more.

question. if you are more productive, if we are producing more, why are millions of people working longer hours for lower wages?

 greed!

 why is almost all new income and wealth going to a small number of people?

 greed!

 you guys are a smart group here. all right. and that's what we're going to deal with. so we are going to tell billionaires who pay an effective tax rate lower than many of you do, we're going to tell large multi-national corporations who make billions of dollars a year in profit and stash their money in the cayman islands and bermuda and in a given year may pay zero in federal income taxes, we're going to tell them that it is time for them to accept their responsibility as americans to start paying their fair share of taxes.

and when we eliminate the cayman islands loophole and when we raise a trillion dollars in new revenue, you know what we're going to do with that? we're going to rebuild our crumbling infrastructure and create millions of decent paying jobs.

this is the united states of america, the greatest country on the face of the earth. you tell me why our roads, our bridges, our water systems, our waste water plants, our levees, our dams, our airports, our rail system are deteriorating or crumbling?

 republicans!

 all right. we need to invest in a $1 trillion investment, which i believe we should make, creates 13 million decent paying jobs.

including a lot of good steelworker jobs.

now, every person in this room -- because of the steelworkers or one of the great unions in our country, you understand the history of the trade union movement. and you understand that change, real change, never comes from the top on down. it always comes from the bottom on up.

and you understand that way back when employers did not say, "well, you know, i think it's a great idea for workers to have a union. we'd love to sit down and do some collective bargaining with you because we think that's fair and that's right." that's not the way it happened.

the way it happened is way back when, workers went on strike, workers fought and workers died, workers were beaten, workers were fired from their jobs in order to make sure that working people could organize, could engage in collective bargaining, could sit down at a table and fight for decent wages and decent working conditions.

that's the history of the trade union movement and we should be proud of that. but what all of you know is that over the last several decades, despite the fact that millions of workers want to join a union, it has become harder and harder for workers to in fact create unions, to become members of unions.

you know and i know that employers have acted illegally with the support of the nlrb so that if workers tried to organize, the organizers there would be fired, and if by some miracle people actually did organize a union, employers would refuse to engage in a first contract, collective bargaining, . and that is why i believe that the middle class does not grow unless the trade union movement grows.

the middle class does not prosper unless workers are engaged in strong collective bargaining. now...

now, what a lot of people -- what a lot of non-union people don't understand is that to the degree they get anywhere near decent wages -- decent wages, it has a lot to do with the success of the trade union movement because you're driving wages up.

in any case, after decades of illegal action on the part of employers, it seems to me we have got to make it easier, not harder for workers to join unions. that's why we have introduced a new fcop piece of legislation, and it says very simply that if 50 percent of workers in a unit plus one sign a card saying they want to be in a union, they will have a union.

here's the truth. here's the truth. not going to tell you that every worker in america wants to join a union, but what i will tell you is that millions of them do. millions of them understand that workers who have a union get better wages, better working conditions and better benefits. and our job is to say that the american people must be able to exercise their constitutional right to organize unions without illegal impediments on the part of employers, and that is what i intend to do.

i mentioned earlier that there are millions of seniors and disabled veterans in this country. and by the way, as the former chairman of the senate committee on veterans affairs, let me thank all of the men and women in this room and in this country for their service to our country.

for their putting their lives on the line to defend this country. and here's a promise i make, is that we will do our best, absolute best, and there should not be any debate about this whether you're a conservative, progressive, democrat or republican. when people put their lives on the line to defend this country and they come home, they are going to get the best health care available. they're going to get the benefits that they earned.

but here's the difference that secretary clinton and i have on a very important issue. i believe that when millions of seniors and disabled vets are struggling to get by on $12,000 or $13,000 a year, it is not good enough to say -- and i've led the effort on this, that we're not going to cut social security. that is an abomination. what we must do is say, "of course we're not going to cut social security, but we are going to expand social security benefits."

and here is how we are going to do it. it is not complicated. right now, somebody makes $5 million a year, somebody makes $118,000 a year, they both contribute the same amount into the social security trust fund.

if you lift that cap and you start at $250,000 and above, top 1.5 percent of the american people, what we can do is increase social security benefits for those now living under $16,000 a year by $1,300 a year. that's not insignificant for people who are struggling.

and when we do that, we also extend the life of social security from 19 years to 50 years. now, that is my view. i think -- i think that at a time of massive income and wealth inequality, when the wealthy are getting much wealthier, you know what? i think it is just appropriate, just right to lift that cap, and ask the wealthiest people in this country to make sure that all seniors can live in dignity.

that is my view, if secretary clinton drops in, ask her her view. i don't think she agrees.

now, when we talk -- and steve raised this issue. when we talk about why it is that the great middle class of this country is disappearing, why it is that we have 47 million people living in poverty, why it is that we have massive wealth and income inequality, one of the important reasons is our disastrous trade policies.  you are looking at a former united states congressman. i represented vermont in the congress for 16 years, and a senator today. you are looking at a member of the senate, who in his life, voted against nafta, against cafta, against pntr with china.

and by the way, is helping to lead the opposition to the tpp. now...

look -- look, everybody in this room understands what these disastrous trade agreements are about. you all know who wrote these trade agreements. not complicated.

the steelworkers did not write these trade agreements. they are written by corporate america to benefit corporate america, people who could care less about what these trade agreements did to working families.

here's what they've done. since 2001 in america, we have lost 60,000 factories. got that? in my state, in iowa, all across this country -- 60,000 factories. not all of that, to be fair, is attributable to trade. there are other reasons why factories shut down, but a lot of it is attributable to trade. and when you lose 60,000 factories, many of them attributable to disastrous trade agreements, you're talking about the loss of millions of good-paying american jobs.

everybody knows what the purpose of these trade agreements were supposed to do. they did exactly what corporate america wanted them to do -- what they were designed to do is to say, why should we pay workers in the united states $20, $25, $30 an hour, provide decent benefits, negotiate with unions, protect the environment, why would any corporation want to do that when they could shut down in america, throw people out on the street, move to china, move to mexico, move to low-wage countries, pay people pennies an hour, not have to worry about the environment, not have to do deal with unions and then they can bring their products right back in this country?

 greed!

 the simple truth is, and it's indisputable, these trade agreements have been a disaster for working families in this country. they have benefited the ceos of large multinational corporations. no one can deny that reality.

i am proud to tell you that way back when i was on the picket line in opposition to nafta and helped lead the opposition against all of these trade agreements. but i got to tell you also, these trade agreements have been supported not just by republicans but by some democrats as well. we've got to acknowledge that.

where we are today is to say that when our country is de- industrializing -- do you know what i mean by that? what i mean, you tell me how are we a great nation if we're not purchasing the products that we need that are made in our country? can you be a great country? can you be a great country where everything you buy is made in china? i don't think so. i don't think so.

and by the way -- this is another important point to be made. it is not only the loss of jobs, it is what we call the race to the bottom. so here's what's going on. people are saying -- and this is a good thing -- people are saying, well, you know what? we're seeing an uptick in manufacturing in america. good. take a look at the wages that those new manufacturing jobs are paying.

there was once a time when manufacturing jobs, unionized manufacturing jobs, were the gold standard for the working class of this country. you had a good job in a manufacturing plant, you had a union, you were making middle-class wages and middle-class benefits. but then -- i'll tell you a story. a couple years ago in louisville, kentucky, general electric announced that they were expanding their manufacturing capabilities, creating a couple hundred jobs. some people were very excited about it. and they asked this guy from ge, they said, why are you doing this? he said, well, it turns out that if you add all of the these things together, transportation costs and the fact that wages in america have gone down, it is actually more competitive to do manufacturing in america now than in china because wages have gone down so much. so they're paying people in manufacturing $10, $12 an hour.

now, if manufacturing workers are getting paid $10, $12 an hour, what do you think other workers are going to be getting? this is the race to the bottom, what they have always wanted. not to bring chinese wages up to where we were, it's to bring our wages down to where chinese wages were.

so this tpp; they want us to support the tpp. they want our people to compete against workers in vietnam. i have nothing against workers in vietnam. i was there, they work very hard. minimum wage in vietnam is 65 cents an hour. i do not want american workers to have to compete against people who are making 65 cents an hour.

so we have to take a deep breath. we have to understand that our trade policies have failed and we have to begin an entirely new set of policies. and the bottom line for me is that every major corporation in america wants all of us to buy their products. can't turn on the tv, buy this, buy that, buy that. well, if they want us to buy their products, they damn well better start manufacturing those products back in the united states and not in china.

let me touch on another important issue and i'm glad our brothers and sisters from the nurses union -- and we thank you so much for your support.

the reason that the nurses are supporting our campaign is that these are serious people who want to be able to do their job as well as they can. all right. thank you job is to prevent disease. their job is to take care of people who are sick. but right now they and many, many other people in the health care profession are unable to do the job that they were trained to do.

now, i think the affordable care act has made some important steps forward and one important step forward that we are not going to allow to go forward is the so-called cadillac tax. we have delayed that and we will continue to push that back. workers who gave up wage increases and other benefits for decent health care should not be penalized for those sacrifices.

but the affordable care act, which i voted for and strongly supported, did a couple -- number of good things. it did away with this obscenity called pre-existing conditions. you all know what that is?

this private insurance obscenity which said if you had a disease years ago, they would not cover you for the disease that you needed coverage for. it's like getting fire insurance except that if you have a fire, then they don't pay. we got rid of that.

we have expanded health insurance to some 17 million americans. we have made it fairer for women who are forced to pay higher rates than they should have for the crime of being a woman. so we kind of eliminated that. but having said that, here's the reality of health care today. and what our campaign is about is asking the american people to think big, not small. here we are.

the united states of america today is the only major country on earth -- the only one, that doesn't guarantee health care to all people as a right. they do it in england. they do it in france, do it in germany, do it all over scandinavia. i live 50 miles away from the canadian border, they do it.

every major country does it. in america today, 29 million people today have no health insurance at all. millions more have high deductibles and high co-payments. sound familiar? ok. and by the way, we pay by far the highest prices in the world for prescription drugs.

at a time when one in five americans are unable to afford the prescription drugs their doctors are prescribing, at a time when seniors are cutting their pills in half because they can't afford to buy what they need, the three major drug companies in america last year made $45 billion in profit.

and because they are so powerful, because they provide hundreds of millions of dollars in lobbying and campaign contributions, because they have 1,400 lobbyists in washington, d.c., there is no legislation on the books to prevent them from doubling, tripling, quadrupling the price you pay for medicine. they are getting away with murder and in some cases, they are committing murder.

we hear from oncologists who are hearing from cancer patients and they're telling us our cancer patients can't afford the medicine that they need. we are dealing in some cases with folks who have hepatitis c. a new drug, a very effective drug out, do you know what that costs? a thousand dollars a pill.

what we have got to tell the pharmaceutical industry -- now, let me back up and tell you a story for a minute. late 1990s, when i represented vermont in the congress, i took a bus load of women from northern vermont over the canadian border to montreal.

and the reason we went is that i knew is that prescription drugs in canada were much less expensive. women who were dealing with breast cancer, working class women, walked into the pharmacy. they purchased the breast cancer medicine that they needed -- this is not generic, brand name medicine for one-tenth the price they're paying in the united states.

i was the first member of congress to do that. others followed. now millions of people, by the way, get their medicine from canada. we should not have to get medicine from canada. pharmaceutical industry has got to stop ripping us off.

now, when you got 29 million uninsured, even more underinsured, when we're paying the highest prices in the world for prescription drugs, it turns out that we are spending per person in health care almost three times more than they do in the united kingdom where they guarantee health care to all of their people. we are spending 50 percent more than the french who guarantee health care to all of their people, much more than the canadians who guarantee all of -- health care to all of their people.

it seems to me that the time is now for us to say loudly and clearly that in the united states of america, health care is a right for all people.

and we are going to pass a medicare for all single payer programs.

and when we do that -- when we do that, not only do we make the nurses and the doctors' jobs easier, because they're going to be able to treat everybody in a comprehensive way, we're going to save the middle class many thousands of dollars a year on health care costs.

we began our campaign for the presidency of the united states nine months ago, and when we began it, i think we were at three, four percent in the polls. we didn't have any money. we didn't have any organization, and frankly, not so many people outside of vermont knew who bernie sanders was. but the message that we have been bringing forth to the american people, a message which says that the economy today is rigged, that it benefits the wealthy and the powerful at the expense of everybody else, that the campaign finance system that exists today is corrupt and undermining american democracy...

that message is resonating all across this country. and here we are in iowa, and one week from yesterday there will be the first caucus in the country. i believe that we have an excellent chance to win that caucus if -- and here is the if. if we have a large voter turnout.

it is going to be a very, very close election, but i believe that if working people want to be part of a campaign which says enough is enough, our government has got to represent all of us and not a handful of campaign contributors, if those people come out and vote, we will win and we'll win big.

let me also say this. let me also say this. this campaign is different from other campaigns, not just because of the fact that i am perhaps the most progressive member of the senate and my agenda in this campaign is the most progressive. this campaign is more than that. and that is what i say every single day and i repeat to you now from the bottom of my heart. no president, not bernie sanders, not anybody else, can do it alone. all right?

now, i want to tell you a painful truth that you understand as proud trade unionists, but not all people in america understand. and that is the powers that be -- wall street, whose greed and recklessness and illegal behavior brought this country into the worst economic downturn since the great depression, they have endless supplies of money, endless.

in fact, somebody on wall street now, i think just announced is going to spend $600,000 in ads against me here in iowa this week -- $600,000 from one guy.

audience member: give them hell, bernie!

 we surely will.

so, you got the power of wall street. i want to remind you something about wall street. you know, congress, against my vote, helped to bail them out because the banks were too big to fail. you remember that?

well, you won't be shocked to know that three out of the four largest banks in this country are bigger today than they were when we bailed them out because they were too big to fail.

and you know what i think? when you have a handful of huge financial institutions with incredible economic and political power, maybe it is time we broke them up.

but it's not just wall street. you deal all of the time with corporate america, whose greed, whose unquenchable greed, they want more and more and more, and they are prepared to step on every working person in this country to get more and more and more. we got to take them on. got to take on the corporate media that decides what we see and what we hear.

we got to take on the large campaign contributors. that's not an easy fight, and no one president alone can do it. and that is why, what this campaign is about is a political revolution.

we need trade unionists. we need millions of people to stand up and be involved in the political process in a way that we have not seen for a very, very long time. what we are fighting for, brothers and sisters, is not only for our well-being, we are fighting for our kids. we are fighting for our parents. we are fighting for the planet.

this is a fight that we cannot afford to lose. and together we will not lose.

thank you very much.
thank you. iowa, thank you.

nine months ago, we came to this beautiful state. we had no political organization. we had no money. we had no name recognition. and we were taking on the most powerful political organization in the united states of america.

and tonight, while the results are still not known, it looks like we are in a virtual tie.

and while the results are still not complete, it looks like we'll have about half of the iowa delegates.

i want to take this opportunity to congratulate secretary clinton…and her organization for waging a very vigorous campaign.

and i want to thank gov. o'malley. it's never easy to lose. i've lost more than one campaign. but he should know that he contributed a whole lot to the dialogue, that he ran an issue-oriented campaign, and he won the respect of the american people.

as i think about what happened tonight, i think the people of iowa have sent a very profound message to the political establishment, to the economic establishment, and by the way, to the media establishment.

that is given the enormous crises facing our country, it is just too late for establishment politics and establishment economics.

what the american people have said — and by the way, i hear this not just from progressives; i hear it from conservatives; i hear it from moderates — and that is we can no longer continue to have a corrupt campaign finance system.

i am the former chairman of the senate veterans committee, and in that capacity not only have i worked hard to try to protect the interests of our veterans, i have the privilege of meeting so many men and women who put their lives on the line to defend us and to protect our way of life. and what they were protecting is an american democracy of one person, one vote, not billionaires buying elections.

i am overwhelmed and i am moved by the fact that millions of people throughout this country have helped volunteer in our country.

that we have received in this campaign 3.5 million individual contributions. people who went to berniesanders.com. and you know what the average contribution was? it was $27.

we do not represent the interests of the billionaire class, wall street, or corporate america. we don't want their money.

and i am very proud to tell you that we are the only candidate on the democratic side without a super pac.

and the reason that we have done so well here in iowa, the reason i believe we're going to so well in new hampshire and in the other states that follow, the reason is the american people are saying no to a rigged economy. they no longer want to see an economy in which the average american works longer hours for lower wages while almost all new income and wealth is going to the top 1%.

what the american people understand was based and is based on fairness — on fairness.

it is not fair when the top 0.1% today owns almost as much wealth as the bottom 90%.

it is not fair when the 20 wealthiest people in this country own more wealth than the bottom half of america.

so are you guys ready for a radical idea?

well, so is america.

and that radical idea is we are going to create an economy that works for working families, not just the billionaire class.

and yes, when millions of our people are working for starvation wages, we are going to raise the minimum wage to $15 an hour.

and yes, we are going to have pay equity for women.

now, i've been all over this beautiful state of iowa. we have spoken to some 70,000 people. and in meeting after meeting, i hear people standing up and they say, "bernie, i went to college. i graduated college. now i am $60,000, $80,000, $90,000 in debt." that is crazy. that is crazy. people should not be punished financially because they want to get a decent education.

and that is why i believe that in year 2016 public colleges and universities should be tuition free.

and then my critics say, "well, bernie, that's a great idea. all this free stuff. how are you going to pay for it?"

i will tell you how we're going to pay for it. we're going to impose a tax on wall street speculation.

the greed, the recklessness, and the illegal behavior of wall street drove this economy to its knees. the american people bailed out wall street. now it's wall street's time to help the middle class.

and when we talk about transforming america, we will end the disgrace of having more people in jail than any other country — disproportionately african-american and latino.

what we are going to do is provide jobs and education for our kids, not more jails and incarceration.

and i'll tell you something that really does astound me. i'm on the senate energy committee. i'm on the senate environmental committee. i have talked to scientists all over the world. the debate is over. climate change is real. and we have a moral responsibility to work with countries throughout the world to transform our energy system away from fossil fuel to energy efficiency and sustainable energy.

and what amazes me — what totally amazes me — is that we have not one republican candidate for president prepared to come up and tell us and agree with what virtually all scientists agree with.

and you know why they are not prepared to do that?

because on the day that they do acknowledge the reality of climate change and call for change, you know what happens? they're going to lose their campaign funds from the koch brothers and the fossil fuel industry.

so i say to the republicans, "stop worrying about your campaign funds from big oil or the koch brothers or the coal industry. worry about the planet you're going to be leaving your children and your grandchildren."

now, i have been criticized during this campaign for many, many things. every single day. that's okay. that's okay.

but let me repeat what i believe. i believe that at a time when every major on earth guarantees health care to people as a right that i believe that we should do the same in the united states of america.

so for all of my critics out there — the wall street journal and the washington post and in corporate america, wherever you may be, let me tell you straight up. yes, i believe that health care is a right, not a privilege.

and that is why i believe in a medicare-for-all single-payer program which will not only guarantee health care to all, it will not only end the pharmaceutical rip-off of the american people, but it will save the middle family — the average middle class family — thousands of dollars a year in health care costs.

let me conclude by saying what no other candidate for president will tell you. and that is that no president, not bernie sanders, not anybody else, will be able to bring about the changes that the working families and the middle class of this country, that the children, that the seniors — our seniors deserve.

no one president can do it because the powers that be — wall street with their endless supply of money, corporate america, the large campaign donors — are so powerful that no president can do what has to be done alone.

and that is why what iowa has begun tonight is a political revolution — a political revolution that says when millions of people come together including those who have given up on the political process — they're so dismayed and so frustrated with what goes on in washington, with young people who before have never been involved in the political process — when young people and working people and seniors begin to stand up and say loudly and clearly "enough is enough!"

that our government — the government of our great country belongs to all of us and not just a handful of billionaires.

when that happens, we will transform this country.

thank you all very much! thank you.

thank you, new hampshire.

shortly after the polls closed, secretary clinton called and was very gracious in her congratulations. i thank her for her call, and i congratulate her and her supporters for the vigorous campaign that they ran in new hampshire.

and, let me take this opportunity to thank the many, many thousands of volunteers here in the granite state who worked so tirelessly. our volunteers worked night and day, made phone calls, and knocked on a heck of a lot of doors, and we won because of your energy. thank you all so much.

i want to thank julia bond and our great campaign staff. we have sent a message that will echo from wall street to washington, from maine to california, and that is that the government of our great country belongs to all of the people and not just a handful of wealthy campaign contributors, and their super pacs.

nine months ago we began our campaign here in new hampshire. we had no campaign organization, we had no money, and we were taking on the most powerful political organization in the united states of america. tonight, with what appears to be a record breaking voter turnout, because of a huge voter turnout -- and i say huge, we won. because we harnessed the energy, and the excitement that the democratic party will need to succeed in november.

what happened here in new hampshire in terms of an enthusiastic, and aroused electorate, people who came out in large numbers. that is what will happen all over this country. let us never forget, democrats and progressives win when voter turnout is high. republicans win when people are demoralized, and voter turnout is low.

tonight, we served notice to the political and economic establishment of this country that the american people will not continue to accept a corrupt campaign finance system that is undermining american democracy, and we will not accept a rigged economy in which ordinary americans work longer hours for lower wages, while almost all new income and wealth goes to the top 1%.

i want to take this opportunity again to congratulate secretary clinton and her organization and supporters for waging a vigorous campaign. i hope that in the days ahead we can continue to wage a strong, issue oriented campaign, and bring new people into the political process.

but, i also hope that we all remember -- and this is a message not just to our opponents, but to those who support me as well. that we will need to come together in a few months and unite this party, and this nation because the right-wing republicans we oppose must not be allowed to gain the presidency.

as we all remember, the last time republicans occupied the white house, their trickle down economic policies drove us into the worst economic downturn since the depression of the 1930's. no, we will not allow huge tax breaks for billionaires, we will not allow packed -- huge cuts to social security, veterans needs, medicare, medicaid, and education. no, we will not allow back into the white house a political party which is so beholden to the fossil fuel industry that they cannot even acknowledge the scientific reality of climate change .

the people of new hampshire have sent a profound message to the political establishment, to the economic establishment, and by the way, to the media establishment.

what the people here have said is given the enormous crises facing our country, it is just too late for the same old, same old establishment politics, and establishment economics. the people want real change. what the american people are saying -- and, by the way, i hear this not just from progressives, but from conservatives and from moderates, is that we can no longer continue to have a campaign finances system in which wall street and the billionaire class are able to buy elections.

americans, no matter what their political view may be, understand that that is not what democracy is about. that is what oligarchy is about, and we will not allow that to continue. i do not have a super pac, and i do not want a super pac. i am overwhelmed, and i am deeply moved far more than i can express in words by the fact that our campaigns financial support comes from more than one million americans who have made more than 3.7 million individual contributions. that is more individual contributions than any candidate in the history of the united states up until this point in an election.

and, you know what that average contribution was? $27 dollars.

i am going to new york city tonight and tomorrow, but i'm not going to new york city to hold a fundraiser on wall street. instead, i'm going to hold a fundraiser right here, right now, across america. my request is please go to berniesanders.com and contribute. please help us raise the funds we need, whether it's $10 bucks, $20 bucks, or $50 bucks. help up us raise the money we need to take the fight to nevada, south carolina, and the states on super tuesday.

so, there it is, that's our fundraiser. pretty quick.

now, what the american people understand is that our great country was based on a simple principal, and that principle is fairness. let me be very clear, it is not fair when we have more income and wealth inequality today than almost any major country on earth. and, when the top one-tenth of 1% now owns almost as much wealth as the bottom 90%, that's not fair. it is not fair when the 20 wealthiest people in this country now own more wealth than the bottom half of the american people.

so, are you guys ready for a radical idea? together we are going to create an economy that works for all of us, not just the 1%. and, when millions of our people are working for starvation wages, yep, we're going to raise the minimum wage to $15 bucks an hour. and, we are going to bring pay equity for women. and, when we need the best educated workforce in the world, yes, we are going to make public colleges and universities tuition free. and, for the millions of americans struggling with horrendous levels of student debt, we are going to substantially ease that burden.

in america people should be financially distressed for decades for the crime, the crime of trying to get a higher education, that's absurd.

well, my critics say, you know, bernie, that's a great idea, you're into all this free stuff. how are you going to pay for it? i will tell you how we're going to pay for it. we're going to impose a tax on wall street speculation. the greed, the recklessness, and the illegal behavior drove our economy to its knees. the american people bailed out wall street, now it's wall street's time to help the middle class.

and, when we talk about transforming america, it means ending the disgrace of this country having more people in jail than any other country in the world, disproportionately african-american, and latino. not only are we going to fight to end institutional racism, and a broken criminal justice system, we are going to provide jobs and education for our young people, not jails and incarceration.

and, let me say that as a member of the energy committee in the senate, and the environmental committee, the debate is over. climate change is real. it is caused by human activity, and it is already causing devastating problems in this country and around the world. we have a moral responsibility to work with countries throughout the world to transform our energy system away from fossil fuel to energy efficiency and sustainable energy.

now, i have been criticized during this campaign for many, many things. every single day, that's ok, that's alright. they're throwing everything at me except the kitchen sink, and i have the feeling that kitchen sink is coming pretty soon as well. but, what our campaign is about is thinking big, not small. it's about having the courage to reject the status quo. it's about saying that in a time when every major country on earth guarantees healthcare to all of their people, we should be doing the same in our great country.

in my view, under president obama's leadership, the affordable care act has been an important step forward, no question about it. but, we can, and must, do better. twenty-nine million americans should not remain uninsured, an even greater number should remain under- insured with large deductibles and co-payments. we should not be paying by far the highest prices in the world for prescription drugs at a time -- listen to this, when the top three drug companies in this country made $45 billion dollars in profit last year. that is an obscenity, and let me tell you something. when we make it to the white house, the pharmaceutical industry will not continue to rip-off the american people.

further, it makes no sense that as a nation we continue to spend far, far more per capita than do the people of any other nation, all of whom guarantee healthcare to all of their people. that is why i believe in a medicare for all, single-payer program which will not only guarantee healthcare for all, but will save the average middle class family thousands of dollars a year in health care costs.

my friends, we all know that we live in a dangerous and complex world. as president i will defend this nation, but i will do it responsibly. i voted against the war in iraq, and that was the right vote. while we must be relentless in combating terrorist who would do us harm, we cannot, and should not be the policeman of the world. nor should we bear the burden of fighting terrorism alone.

in the middle east, the united states must remain part of an international coalition sustained by nations in the region that have the means to protect themselves. together we must, and will, destroy isis, but we should do it in a way that does not put our young men and women in the military into perpetual warfare in the quagmire of the middle east.

my friends, we must fix our broken immigration system that divides families, and create a path towards citizenship for hardworking people who are living in the shadows.

we must strengthen and expand social security, and increase the benefits that seniors, and disabled vets receive so that people can live in dignity in their retirement. we must rebuild our crumbling infrastructure, and when we do that, we create millions of decent paying jobs.

we must pursue the fight for women's rights, for gay rights, for disability rights. we must against stronger, and stronger, opposition protect the right of a woman to control her own body.

we must protect the men and women who serve our nation in uniform, and protect our veterans who put their lives on the line to defend us.

my friends, we must tell the billionaire class and the 1% that they cannot have it all at a time of massive wealth and income inequality, the wealthiest people and largest corporations in this country will start their paying their fair share of taxes.

my friends, i am the son of a polish immigrant who came to this country speaking no english, and having no money. my father worked everyday of his life, and he never made a whole lot. my mom and dad, and brother and i grew up in a small three and a half room, rent controlled apartment in brooklyn, new york. my mother, who died at a young age, always dreamed of moving out of that apartment, getting a home of her own, but she never realized that dream.

the truth is that neither one of my parents could ever have dreamed that i would be here tonight standing before you as a candidate for president of the united states.

this is the promise of america, and this is the promise we must keep alive for future generations. what began last week in iowa, what voters here in new hampshire confirm tonight, is nothing short of the beginning of a political revolution.

it is a political revolution that will bring tens of millions of our people together. it will bring together working people who have given up on the political process. it will bring together young people who have never participated in the political process. it will bring together blacks, and whites, latinos, asian-americans, native americans, straight and gay, male and female. people who were born in america, and people who immigrated here.

we will all come together to say loudly, and clearly that the government of our great nation belongs to all of us, not just a few wealthy campaign contributors. that is what this campaign is about, that is what the political revolution is about. so, new hampshire, thank you again. and, now it's time.

thank you, new hampshire. and, now it's on to nevada, south carolina, and beyond.thank you! it is good to be home!

you know, i have been all over this country, but the truth is, it is great and great to come home and see all my friends.

you know, we want to win in every part of the country, that goes without saying. but it does say something and means so much to me that the people who know me best, the people who knew me before i was elected, who knew me as mayor, knew me as congressman, and know me as senator, have voted so strongly to put us in the white house. thank you so much.

this campaign — as i think all of you know, this campaign is not just about electing the president. it is about transforming america.

it is about making our great country the nation that we know it has the potential to be.

it is about dealing with some unpleasant truths that exist in america today and having the guts to confront those truths.

it is about recognizing that in our state, we have town meetings and people come out, they argue about budgets, and then they vote. one person, one vote.

in vermont, billionaires do not buy town meetings, and in america, we are going to end a corrupt campaign finance system.(applause)

we can disagree in a democracy, and that’s what a democracy is about, but i hope all of us agree that we’re going to not allow billionaires and their super pacs to destroy american democracy.

in our state — in our state, you all know that we have many, many thousands of vermonters who are working not just one job, they’re working two jobs, they’re working three jobs.

and you all know that while our people are working so hard, almost all of the new wealth and income generated in america is going to the top 1 percent.(booing)

well, together, what we are going to do is create an economy that works for all of us, not just the people on top.

and together, we are going to end and reform a broken criminal justice system.

this country, the wealthiest country in the history of the world, should not be having more people in jail than any other country on earth. that’s wrong.

so we are going to invest for our young people in education, in jobs, not jails or incarceration.

now, i know many of my republican colleagues think that climate change is a hoax.(booing)

well, i believe that you don’t develop real public policy unless you listen to the science, and the science is clear.

together, we are going to transform our energy system away from fossil fuel to energy efficiency and sustainable energy.

now, i know that secretary clinton and many of the establishment people think that i am looking and thinking too big. i don’t think so.(booing)

so let me go on the record and say as you have heard me say for years, health care is a right for all people.

and let me also say that in the united states of america, when we talk about public education, it’s not just first grade through 12th that has got to be expanded to make public colleges and universities tuition-free.(applause)

what i have said from day one in this campaign and i suspect many of you were down on the lake with me when we announced on that beautiful day.

what i have said is that this campaign is not just about electing a president. it is about making a political revolution.

what that revolution is about is bringing millions of millions of people into the political process. working people who have been so disillusioned, they no longer vote. young people who have never been involved.

what the political revolution is about is bringing our people together. black and white, latino, asian-american.

gay and straight. people born in america, people who have immigrated to america. when we bring our people together, when we do not allow the donald trumps of the world to divide us up.

when we bring our people together and when we have the courage to stand up to the billionaire class and tell them they can’t have it all.

that our government belongs to all of us, not just super pacs and wealthy campaign contributors.

now, tonight, you’re going to see a lot of election results come in. and let me remind you of what the media often forgets about. these are not — this is not a general election. it is not winner-take-all. if you get 52 percent, you get 48 percent, you roughly end up with the same amount of delegates in a state. by the end of tonight, we are going to win many hundreds of delegates.



ten months ago, as you know better than any other group in america, when we were out on the lake, we were at 3 percent in the polls. we have come a very long way in 10 months.

at the end of tonight, 15 states will have voted, 35 states remain. and let me assure you that we are going to take our fight for economic justice, for social justice, for environmental sanity, for a world of peace to every one of those states.

now, wall street may be against us and the super pacs may be against us. but you know why we’re going to win? because our message is resonating and the people when we stand together will be victorious.

so on a personal note, i want to thank all of you for the love and the friendship that you have given our family. you have sustained me.

and i am so proud to bring vermont values all across this country.

so thank you again for helping us win here in vermont tonight.

and i look forward this evening to just saying hello to so many old friends.

so thank you all very much!
points down a few days ago, who repudiated the pundits who said that bernie sanders was not going anywhere.

and, i want to thank the many thousands of volunteers that we had in the state of michigan for knocking on doors and for making the phone calls that made this kind of enormously successful night for us.

in the last week we have won three caucuses, and two of them with -- were record breaking turnouts. and, whether we win or lose tonight in michigan, basically the delegates here are going to be split up because of proportional representation.

and, what tonight means is that the bernie sanders campaign, the people's revolution that we are talking about, the political revolution that we are talking about, is strong in every part of the country and frankly we believe that our strongest areas are yet to happen. we're going to do very, very well in the west coast and other parts of this country.

what the american people are saying is they are tired of a corrupt campaign finance system, and super pacs funded by wall street and the billionaire class. they are tired of a rigged economy in which people in michigan, people in illinois, people in ohio, are working longer hours for lower wages, worried to death about the future of their kids, and yet almost all new income and wealth is going to the top one percent.

and, the people of america are tired of a broken criminal justice system in which we have more people in jail, largely african american, latino, native american. more people in jail than any other major country on earth.

so, we started this campaign, as many will remember, 10 months ago. we were 60 or 70 points down in the polls, and yet we have -- what we have seen is in poll after poll, state after state, what we have done is created the kind of momentum that we need to win.

so, once again, this has been a fantastic night in michigan, we're very grateful for all of the support that we have gotten from this state, and we look forward to going to illinois, ohio, missouri, and the other states that we will be competing in next week. thank you all very much.i was invited along with other presidential candidates to be at the aipac conference in washington, but obviously i could not make it because we are here.

the issues that aipac is dealing with are very important issues and i wanted to give the same speech here as i would have given if we were at that conference.

let me begin by saying that i think i am probably the only candidate for president who has personal ties with israel. i spent a number of months there when i was a young man on a kibbutz, so i know a little bit about israel.

clearly, the united states and israel are united by historical ties. we are united by culture. we are united by our values, including a deep commitment to democratic principles, civil rights and the rule of law.

israel is one of america's closest allies, and we – as a nation – are committed not just to guaranteeing israel's survival, but also to make sure that its people have a right to live in peace and security.

to my mind, as friends – long term friends with israel – we are obligated to speak the truth as we see it. that is what real friendship demands, especially in difficult times.

our disagreements will come and go, and we must weather them constructively.

but it is important among friends to be honest and truthful about differences that we may have.

america and israel have faced great challenges together. we have supported each other, and we will continue to do just that as we face a very daunting challenge and that is the israeli-palestinian conflict.

i am here to tell the american people that, if elected president, i will work tirelessly to advance the cause of peace as a partner and as a friend to israel.

but to be successful, we have also got to be a friend not only to israel, but to the palestinian people, where in gaza unemployment today is 44 percent and we have there a poverty rate which is almost as high.

so when we talk about israel and palestinian areas, it is important to understand that today there is a whole lot of suffering among palestinians and that cannot be ignored. you can't have good policy that results in peace if you ignore one side.

the road toward peace will be difficult. wonderful people, well-intentioned people have tried decade after decade to achieve that and it will not be easy. i cannot tell you exactly how it will look – i do not believe anyone can – but i firmly believe that the only prospect for peace is the successful negotiation of a two-state solution.

the first step in that road ahead is to set the stage for resuming the peace process through direct negotiations.

progress is never made unless people are prepared to sit down and talk to each other. this is no small thing. it means building confidence on both sides, offering some signs of good faith, and then proceeding to talks when conditions permit them to be constructive. again, this is not easy, but that is the direction we've got to go.

this will require compromises on both sides, but i believe it can be done. i believe that israel, the palestinians, and the international community can, must, and will rise to the ocassion and do what needs to be done to achieve a lasting peace in a region of the world that has seen so much war, so much conflict and so much suffering.

peace will require the unconditional recognition by all people of israel's right to exist. it will require an end to attacks of all kinds against israel.

peace will require that organizations like hamas and hezbollah renounce their efforts to undermine the security of israel. it will require the entire world to recognize israel.

peace has to mean security for every israeli from violence and terrorism.

but peace also means security for every palestinian. it means achieving self-determination, civil rights, and economic well-being for the palestinian people.

peace will mean ending what amounts to the occupation of palestinian territory, establishing mutually agreed upon borders, and pulling back settlements in the west bank, just as israel did in gaza – once considered an unthinkable move on israel's part.

that is why i join much of the international community, including the u.s. state department and european union, in voicing my concern that israel's recent expropriation of an additional 579 acres of land in the west bank undermines the peace process and, ultimately, israeli security as well.

it is absurd for elements within the netanyahu government to suggest that building more settlements in the west bank is the appropriate response to the most recent violence. it is also not acceptable that the netanyahu government decided to withhold hundreds of millions of shekels in tax revenue from the palestinians, which it is supposed to collect on their behalf.

but, by the same token, it is also unacceptable for president abbas to call for the abrogation of the oslo agreement when the goal should be the ending of violence.

peace will also mean ending the economic blockade of gaza. and it will mean a sustainable and equitable distribution of precious water resources so that israel and palestine can both thrive as neighbors.

right now, israel controls 80 percent of the water reserves in the west bank. inadequate water supply has contributed to the degradation and desertification of palestinian land. a lasting peace will have to recognize palestinians are entitled to control their own lives and there is nothing human life needs more than water.

peace will require strict adherence by both sides to the tenets of international humanitarian law. this includes israeli ending disproportionate responses to being attacked – even though any attack on israel is unacceptable.

we recently saw a dramatic example of just how important this concept is. in 2014, the decades-old conflict escalated once more as israel launched a major military campaign against hamas in the gaza strip. the israeli offensive came after weeks of indiscriminate rocket fire into its territory and the kidnapping of israeli citizens.

of course, i strongly object to hamas' long held position that israel does not have the right to exist – that is unacceptable. of course, i strongly condemn indiscriminate rocket fire by hamas into israeli territory, and hamas' use of civilian neighborhoods to launch those attacks. i condemn the fact that hamas diverted funds and materials for much-needed construction projects designed to improve the quality of life of the palestinian people, and instead used those funds to construct a network of tunnels for military purposes.

however, let me also be very clear: i – along with many supporters of israel – spoke out strongly against the israeli counter attacks that killed nearly 1,500 civilians and wounded thousands more. i condemned the bombing of hospitals, schools and refugee camps.

today, gaza is still largely in ruins. the international community must come together to help gaza recover. that doesn't mean rebuilding factories that produce bombs and missiles – but it does mean rebuilding schools, homes and

hospitals that are vital to the future of the palestinian people.

these are difficult subjects. they are hard to talk about both for many americans and for israelis. i recognize that, but it is clear to me that the path toward peace will require tapping into our shared humanity to make hard but just decisions.

nobody can tell you when peace will be achieved between israel and the palestinians. no one knows the exact order that compromises will have to be made to reach a viable two-state solution. but as we undertake that work together, the united states will continue its unwavering commitment to the safety of israeli citizens and the country of israel.

let me just say a word about an overall agenda for the middle east.

of course, beyond the palestinian question, israel finds itself in the midst of a region in severe upheaval.

first, the so-called islamic state – isis – threatens the security of the entire region and beyond, including our own country and our allies. secretary of state kerry was right to say that isis is committing genocide, and there is no doubt in my mind that the united states must continue to participate in an international coalition to destroy this barbaric organization.

while obviously much needs to be done, so far our effort has had some important progress, as airstrikes have degraded isis' military capacity, and the group has lost more than 20 percent of its territory in the past year.

so we are making some progress.

but we are entering a difficult period in the campaign against isis.

the government in baghdad has yet to achieve a sustainable political order that unites iraq's various ethnic and sectarian factions, which has limited its ability to sustain military victories against isis. unless there is a united government, it's going to be hard to be effective in destroying isis.

more inclusive, stable governance in iraq will be vital to inflict a lasting defeat on isis. otherwise, isis could regain its influence or another, similar organization may spring up in its place.

in syria, the challenges are even more difficult. the fractured nature of the civil war there has often diluted the fight against isis – exemplified by the russian airstrikes that prioritized hitting anti-assad fighters rather than isis. and, just like in iraq, isis cannot be defeated until the groups that take territory from isis can responsibly govern the areas they take back. ultimately, this will require a political framework for all of syria.

the u.s. must also play a greater role disrupting the financing of isis and efforts on the internet to turn disaffected youth into a new generation of terrorists.

while the u.s. has an important role to play in defeating isis, that struggle must be led by the muslim countries themselves on the ground. i agree with king abdullah of jordan who a number of months ago that made it clear what is going on there right now is nothing less than a battle for the soul of islam and the only people who will effectively destroy isis there will be muslim troops on the ground.

so what we need is a coalition of those countries.

now, i am not suggesting that saudi arabia or any other states in the region invade other countries, nor unilaterally intervene in conflicts driven in part by sectarian tensions.

what i am saying is that the major powers in the region – especially the gulf states – have to take greater responsibility for the future of the middle east and the defeat of isis.

what i am saying is that countries like qatar – which intends to spend up to $200 billion to host the 2022 world cup – qatar which per capita is the wealthiest nation in the world – qatar can do more to contribute to the fight against isis. if they are prepared to spend $200 billion for a soccer tournament, then they have got to spend a lot spend a lot more against a barbaric organization.

what i am also saying is that other countries in the region – like saudi arabia, which has the 4th largest defense budget in the world – has to dedicate itself more fully to the destruction of isis, instead of other military adventures like the one it is pursuing right now in yemen.

and keep in mind that while isis is obviously a dangerous and formidable enemy, isis has only 30,000 fighters on the ground. so when we ask the nations in the region to stand up to do more against isis – nations in the region which have millions of men and women under arms – we know it is surely within their capability to destroy isis.

now the united states has every right in the world to insist on these points. remember – i want everybody to remember – that not so many years ago it was the united states and our troops that reinstalled the royal family in kuwait after saddam hussein's invasion in 1990. we put these people back on the throne. now they have the obligation to work with us and other countries to destroy isis.

the very wealthy – and some of these countries are extraordinarily wealthy from oil money or gas money – these very wealthy and powerful nations in the region can no longer expect the united states to do their work for them. uncle sam cannot and should not do it all. we are not the policeman of the world.

as we continue a strongly coordinated effort against isis, the united states and other western nations should be supportive of efforts to fight isis and al-qaeda. but it is the countries in the region that have to stand up against these violently extremist and brutal organizations.

now i realize that given the geopolitics of the region this is not going to be easy. i realize that there are very strong and historical disagreements between different countries in the region about how isis should be dealt with.

i realize different countries have different priorities. but we can help set the agenda and mobilize stronger collective action to defeat isis in a lasting way.

bottom line is the countries in the region – countries which by the way are most threatened by isis – they're going to have to come together, they're going to have to work out their compromises, they are going to have to lead the effort with the support of the united states and other major powers in destroying isis.

another major challenge in the region, of course, is the syrian civil war itself – one of the worst humanitarian disasters in recent history.

after five years of brutal conflict, the only solution in syria will be, in my view, a negotiated political settlement. those who advocate for stronger military involvement by the u.s. to oust assad from power have not paid close enough attention to history. that would simply prolong the war and increase the chaos in syria, not end it.

in other words, we all recognize that assad is a brutal dictator. but i think that our priorities right now have got to be destroy isis, work out a political settlement with russia and iran to get assad out of power.

i applaud secretary kerry and the obama administration for negotiating a partial ceasefire between the assad regime and most opposition forces. the ceasefire shows the value of american-led diplomacy, rather than escalating violence. it may not seem like a lot, but it is. diplomacy in this instance has had some real success.

let me also say what i think most americans now understand, that for a great military power like the united states it is easy to use a war to remove a tyrant from power, but it is much more difficult to comprehend the day after that tyrant is removed from power and a political vacuum occurs.

all of us know what has occurred in iraq. we got rid of saddam hussein, a brutal, brutal murderer and a tyrant. and yet we created massive instability in that region which led to the creation of isis. i am very proud to have been one of the members in congress to vote against that disastrous war.

and the situation is not totally dissimilar from what has happened in libya. we got rid of a terrible dictator there, colonel gaddafi, but right now chaos has erupted and isis now has a foothold in that area.

bottom line is that regime change for a major power like us is not hard. but understanding what happens afterward is something that always has got to be taken into consideration.

in my view, the military option for a powerful nation like ours – the most powerful nation in the world – should always be on the table. that's why we have the most powerful military in the world. but it should always be the last resort not the first resort.

another major challenge in the region is iran, which routinely destabilizes the middle east and threatens the security of israel.

now, i think all of us agree that iran must not be able to acquire a nuclear weapon. that would just destabilize the entire region and create disastrous consequences.

where we may disagree is how to achieve that goal. i personally strongly supported the nuclear deal with the united states, france, china, germany, russia, the united kingdom and iran because i believe it is the best hope to prevent iran from developing a nuclear weapon.

i want to thank the obama administration for doing a very good job under very, very difficult circumstances.

i believe we have an obligation to pursue diplomatic solutions before resorting to military intervention.

you know it is very easy for politicians to go before the people and talk about how tough we are, and we want to wipe out everybody else. but i think if we have learned anything from history is that we pursue every diplomatic option before we resort to military intervention.

and interestingly enough, more often than not, diplomacy can achieve goals that military intervention cannot achieve. and that is why i supported the sanctions that brought iran to the negotiating table and allowed us to reach an agreement.

but let me tell you what i firmly believe. the bottom line is this: if successfully implemented – and i think it can be – the nuclear deal will prevent iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon. and preventing iran from getting the bomb makes the world a safer place.

does the agreement achieve everything i would like? of course not.

but to my mind, it is far better than the path we were on with iran developing nuclear weapons and the potential for military intervention by the united states and israel growing greater by the day.

i do not accept the idea that the "pro-israel" position was to oppose the deal.

preventing iran from getting a nuclear weapon will strengthen not only the united states' security, but israel's security as well.

and i am not alone in that idea. while prime minister netanyahu is vocally opposed to the accord, his is hardly a consensus opinion in israel and it's important that everyone understand that. dozens of former security officials, including retired army generals and chiefs of the shin bet and mossad intelligence agencies support the agreement. netanyahu may not, but many others in israel do.

but let me be clear: if iran does not live up to the agreement, we should re-impose sanctions and all options are back on the table.

moreover, the deal does not mean we let iran's aggressive acts go unchecked. the world must stand united in condemning iran's recent ballistic missile tests as well as its continued support for terrorism through groups like hezbollah.

going forward, i believe we need a longer-term vision for dealing with iran that balances two important objectives.

first, we must counter the destabilizing behavior of iran's leaders.

but secondly we must also leave the door open to more diplomacy to encourage iranian moderates and the segments of the iranian people – especially the younger generations – who want a better relationship with the west. while only a small step in the right direction, i was heartened by the results of the recent parliamentary elections in which iranian voters elected moderates in what was, in part, a referendum on the nuclear deal.

i know that some say there is just no dealing with iran – in any way at all – for the foreseeable future. and that is the position of some. after all, iran is in a competition with saudi arabia and its allies for influences over that region.

but a more balanced approach toward iran that serves our national security interests should hardly be a radical idea. we have serious concerns about the nature of the iranian government, but we have to be honest enough, and sometimes we are not, to admit that saudi arabia – a repressive regime in its own right – is hardly an example of jeffersonian democracy.

balancing firmness with willingness to engage with diplomacy in dealing with iran will not be easy. but it is the wisest course of action to help improve the long-term prospects of stability and peace in the middle east – and to keep us safe.

lastly, these are but some – not all – of the major issues where the interests of israel intersect with those of the united states. i would address these issues and challenges as i would most issues and that is by having an honest discussion and by bringing people together.

the truth is there are good people on both sides who want peace, and the other truth is there are despots and liars on both sides who benefit from continued antagonism.

i would conclude by saying there has been a disturbing trend among some of the republicans in this presidential election that take a very, very different approach. and their approach i think would be a disaster for this country. the republican front-runner, donald trump, suggested limiting immigration according to religion and creating a national database based on religion – something unprecedented in our country's history.

now this would not only go against everything we stand for as a nation, but also – in terms of our relationship to the rest of the world – it would be a disaster.

let me just conclude by saying this: the issues that i've discussed today are not going to be easily solved.

everybody knows that. but i think the united states has the opportunity, as the most powerful nation on earth, to play an extraordinary role in trying to bring people together – to try to put together coalitions in the region to destroy isis.

and that is a responsibility that i, if elected president, would accept in a very, very serious way. we have seen too many wars, too much killing, too much suffering. and let us all together – people of good faith – do everything we can to finally, finally bring peace and stability to that region.

thank you all very much. i am honored to be with you today and was pleased to receive your invitation to speak to this conference of the pontifical academy of social sciences. today we celebrate the encyclical centesimus annus and reflect on its meaning for our world a quarter-century after it was presented by pope john paul ii. with the fall of communism, pope john paul ii gave a clarion call for human freedom in its truest sense: freedom that defends the dignity of every person and that is always oriented towards the common good.

the church's social teachings, stretching back to the first modern encyclical about the industrial economy, rerum novarum in 1891, to centesimus annus, to pope francis's inspiring encyclical laudato si' this past year, have grappled with the challenges of the market economy. there are few places in modern thought that rival the depth and insight of the church's moral teachings on the market economy.

over a century ago, pope leo xiii highlighted economic issues and challenges in rerum novarum that continue to haunt us today, such as what he called "the enormous wealth of a few as opposed to the poverty of the many."

and let us be clear. that situation is worse today. in the year 2016, the top one percent of the people on this planet own more wealth than the bottom 99 percent, while the wealthiest 60 people – 60 people – own more than the bottom half – 3 1/2 billion people. at a time when so few have so much, and so many have so little, we must reject the foundations of this contemporary economy as immoral and unsustainable.

the words of centesimus annus likewise resonate with us today. one striking example:

furthermore, society and the state must ensure wage levels adequate for the maintenance of the worker and his family, including a certain amount for savings. this requires a continuous effort to improve workers' training and capability so that their work will be more skilled and productive, as well as careful controls and adequate legislative measures to block shameful forms of exploitation, especially to the disadvantage of the most vulnerable workers, of immigrants and of those on the margins of society. the role of trade unions in negotiating minimum salaries and working conditions is decisive in this area. (para15)

the essential wisdom of centesimus annus is this: a market economy is beneficial for productivity and economic freedom. but if we let the quest for profits dominate society; if workers become disposable cogs of the financial system; if vast inequalities of power and wealth lead to marginalization of the poor and the powerless; then the common good is squandered and the market economy fails us. pope john paul ii puts it this way: profit that is the result of "illicit exploitation, speculation, or the breaking of solidarity among working people . . . has not justification, and represents an abuse in the sight of god and man." (para43).
we are now twenty-five years after the fall of communist rule in eastern europe. yet we have to acknowledge that pope john paul's warnings about the excesses of untrammeled finance were deeply prescient. twenty-five years after centesimus annus, speculation, illicit financial flows, environmental destruction, and the weakening of the rights of workers is far more severe than it was a quarter century ago. financial excesses, indeed widespread financial criminality on wall street, played a direct role in causing the world's worst financial crisis since the great depression.

we need a political analysis as well as a moral and anthropological analysis to understand what has happened since 1991. we can say that with unregulated globalization, a world market economy built on speculative finance burst through the legal, political, and moral constraints that had once served to protect the common good. in my country, home of the world's largest financial markets, globalization was used as a pretext to deregulate the banks, ending decades of legal protections for working people and small businesses. politicians joined hands with the leading bankers to allow the banks to become "too big to fail." the result: eight years ago the american economy and much of the world was plunged into the worst economic decline since the 1930s. working people lost their jobs, their homes and their savings, while the government bailed out the banks.

inexplicably, the united states political system doubled down on this reckless financial deregulation, when the u.s. supreme court in a series of deeply misguided decisions, unleashed an unprecedented flow of money into american politics. these decisions culminated in the infamous citizen united case, which opened the financial spigots for huge campaign donations by billionaires and large corporations to turn the u.s. political system to their narrow and greedy advantage. it has established a system in which billionaires can buy elections. rather than an economy aimed at the common good, we have been left with an economy operated for the top 1 percent, who get richer and richer as the working class, the young and the poor fall further and further behind. and the billionaires and banks have reaped the returns of their campaign investments, in the form of special tax privileges, imbalanced trade agreements that favor investors over workers, and that even give multinational companies extra-judicial power over governments that are trying to regulate them.

but as both pope john paul ii and pope francis have warned us and the world, the consequences have been even direr than the disastrous effects of financial bubbles and falling living standards of working-class families. our very soul as a nation has suffered as the public lost faith in political and social institutions. as pope francis has stated: "man is not in charge today, money is in charge, money rules." and the pope has also stated: "we have created new idols. the worship of the golden calf of old has found a new and heartless image in the cult of money and the dictatorship of an economy which is faceless and lacking any truly humane goal."

and further: "while the income of a minority is increasing exponentially, that of the majority is crumbling. this imbalance results from ideologies which uphold the absolute autonomy of markets and financial speculation, and thus deny the right of control to states, which are themselves charged with providing for the common good."

pope francis has called on the world to say: "no to a financial system that rules rather than serves" in evangeli gaudium. and he called upon financial executives and political leaders to pursue financial reform that is informed by ethical considerations. he stated plainly and powerfully that the role of wealth and resources in a moral economy must be that of servant, not master.

the widening gaps between the rich and poor, the desperation of the marginalized, the power of corporations over politics, is not a phenomenon of the united states alone. the excesses of the unregulated global economy have caused even more damage in the developing countries. they suffer not only from the boom-bust cycles on wall street, but from a world economy that puts profits over pollution, oil companies over climate safety, and arms trade over peace. and as an increasing share of new wealth and income goes to a small fraction of those at the top, fixing this gross inequality has become a central challenge. the issue of wealth and income inequality is the great economic issue of our time, the great political issue of our time, and the great moral issue of our time. it is an issue that we must confront in my nation and across the world.

pope francis has given the most powerful name to the predicament of modern society: the globalization of indifference. "almost without being aware of it," he noted, "we end up being incapable of feeling compassion at the outcry of the poor, weeping for other people's pain, and feeling a need to help them, as though all this were someone else's responsibility and not our own." we have seen on wall street that financial fraud became not only the norm but in many ways the new business model. top bankers have shown no shame for their bad behavior and have made no apologies to the public. the billions and billions of dollars of fines they have paid for financial fraud are just another cost of doing business, another short cut to unjust profits.

some might feel that it is hopeless to fight the economic juggernaut, that once the market economy escaped the boundaries of morality it would be impossible to bring the economy back under the dictates of morality and the common good. i am told time and time again by the rich and powerful, and the mainstream media that represent them, that we should be "practical," that we should accept the status quo; that a truly moral economy is beyond our reach. yet pope francis himself is surely the world's greatest demonstration against such a surrender to despair and cynicism. he has opened the eyes of the world once again to the claims of mercy, justice and the possibilities of a better world. he is inspiring the world to find a new global consensus for our common home.

i see that hope and sense of possibility every day among america's young people. our youth are no longer satisfied with corrupt and broken politics and an economy of stark inequality and injustice. they are not satisfied with the destruction of our environment by a fossil fuel industry whose greed has put short term profits ahead of climate change and the future of our planet. they want to live in harmony with nature, not destroy it. they are calling out for a return to fairness; for an economy that defends the common good by ensuring that every person, rich or poor, has access to quality health care, nutrition and education.

as pope francis made powerfully clear last year in laudato si', we have the technology and know-how to solve our problems – from poverty to climate change to health care to protection of biodiversity. we also have the vast wealth to do so, especially if the rich pay their way in fair taxes rather than hiding their funds in the world's tax and secrecy havens- as the panama papers have shown.

the challenges facing our planet are not mainly technological or even financial, because as a world we are rich enough to increase our investments in skills, infrastructure, and technological know-how to meet our needs and to protect the planet. our challenge is mostly a moral one, to redirect our efforts and vision to the common good. centesimus annus, which we celebrate and reflect on today, and laudato si', are powerful, eloquent and hopeful messages of this possibility. it is up to us to learn from them, and to move boldly toward the common good in our time.  i think it's very difficult. i think there are -- and this is a real american tragedy. there are millions of people, working class people and low income people who turn on the television and you know what they see?

nothing being talked about the reality of their lives. they listen to what goes on in congress, they can't for -- afford to feed their kids. they can't pay for their electric bills because we have 47 million people living in poverty. and they see congress debating tax breaks for billionaires and candidates taking huge sums of money from the wealthy and the powerful.

and they conclude -- and it's kind of hard to argue with them -- that the system is -- the political system is corrupt. and they are saying and candidates taking huge sums of money from the wealthy and the powerful.

and they conclude -- and it's kind of hard to argue with them -- that the system is -- the political system is corrupt. and they are saying to themselves, why do i want to participate in this charade?

now, we are trying -- and we've had really good success with young people. i think we're bringing out a whole lot of young people, to some degree with working class people and maybe with low income people.

but it is very, very hard to tell people who are struggling now and seeing almost all new income and wealth going to the top 1 percent, that they should get involved in the political process, that their voices actually matter. and let me answer it, uh, in this way. um, first, um, i think it is, you know, we are not a movement where i can snap my fingers and say to you or to anybody else what you should do, because you won't listen to me. you shouldn't. uh, you'll make these decisions yourself.

i think if we end up losing -- and i hope we do not -- and if secretary clinton wins, it is incumbent upon her to tell millions of people who right now do not believe in establishment politics or establishment economics, who have serious misgivings about a candidate who has received millions of dollars from wall street and other special interests.

she has got to go out to you and to millions of other people and say, yes, i think the united states should join the rest of the industrialized world and take on the private insurance companies and the greed of the drug companies and pass a medicare for all.

i think that says secretary clinton, that for the young people in this country, you should not have to leave college $30,000, $50,000, $70,000 in debt because we're going to make as many other countries around the world do, public colleges and universities tuition-free. i think secretary clinton is going to have to explain to millions of young people and a lot of other people that climate change is a real crisis and incrementalism is just not going to solve it. that's... ......

and she is going to have to come on board and say, yes, i know it's hard, but i am going to take on the fossil fuel industry and pass a carbon tax.

so the -- the point that i am making is, it is incumbent upon secretary clinton to reach out not only to my supporters, but to all of the american people, with an agenda that they believe will represent the interests of working families, lower income people, the middle class, those of us who are concerned about the environment and not just big money interests. i work with republicans in the u.s. senate and i see what they do in the house. i think the republican party today has moved so far to the right that they are way, way, way out of touch with where the american people are.

these are people who almost without exception do not even recognize the reality of climate change, let alone want to anything about it.

they want to cut social security and give tax breaks to billionaires. they want to end the affordable care act, but they have nothing to replace it with.

i will do everything in my power to make sure that no republican gets into the white house in this election cycle. you're right in saying that a lot of the day to day work is going to take place in capitol hill and it's messy and there's a lot of negotiating. what i will tell you is that when i was in the house, in a given number of years, i ended up passing more amendments on the floor of the house working with republicans than any other member of the house. i can work with republicans.

just a few years ago, i helped pass, as chairman of the senate veterans committee, the most comprehensive veterans legislation in modern history...  ...working with john mccain and a number of other republicans.

so if the question is, can i sit down, you know, with conservative people like chris here and negotiate with them...  ...yes, i can do that.

but let me also say this, and this is important. at the end of the day, the powers that be, the powers who control -- people who control the congress, the big money interests and wall street, they are not going to allow the kind of real change that this country needs, raising the minimum wage to $15 an hour, ending our disastrous trade policies so that corporate america starts investing in this country rather than china, making sure that women do not continue to earn 79 cents on the dollar compared to men, aggressively addressing climate change, making sure that public colleges and universities are tuition-free.

that is not going to be done by congress itself. that requires a political revolution. and as president of the united states, what i would do is use the bully pulpit in an unprecedented way to rally the american people to demand that the congress listens to their needs, not just the needs of wealthy campaign contributors.  first of all, please do not be disappointed in my views on pre-k. i believe that we have right now in my state and in pennsylvania a dysfunctional pre-k system, which is a national disgrace. that we have child care workers who make less than mcdonald's employees, where we have parents who cannot find quality affordable childcare.

we have kids who are entering school way behind because they are not getting the intellectual or emotional nourishment that they need. i believe absolutely, and if elected president one of my priorities would be to establish a cutting-edge high-quality pre-k system in every state in this country. i can't think of many things that are more important to me than that.

but when it comes to funding these programs, at a time when we have massive income and wealth inequality, when the top one-tenth of 1 percent now owns almost as much wealth as the bottom 90 percent, when 58 percent of all the income goes to the top 1 percent, to ask poor people to pay for that, it's wrong. you are taking money from the people who are hurting the most.

so please count me in as somebody who will aggressively lead the effort for universal, high quality childcare, but i believe it has to be funded in a progressive way. the wealthy and large corporations are going to have to pay for it. look, big soda companies will do what they do. and let me also be clear. i am more than aware of the negative role that sugar is playing in terms of obesity and health in the united states. but what we have got to do is to have progressive taxation.

look, and i don't want to have to repeat it, the truth is the very, very rich are becoming much richer. almost everybody else is becoming poor. it is absurd to go to some of the poorest people and raise their taxes. and by the way, this tax, if i recall, is three cents an ounce. twelve ounce bottle of soda, that's 36 cents, times five sodas week, that's two bucks, 100 bucks a year. if you don't have a lot of money, you know, that's a lot.

so i think what we have got to do is to understand that nationally we need progressive taxation. there are corporations, chris, right now who make billions of dollars a year in profit, stash their money in the cayman islands, not paying a nickel in federal taxes. i intend to and that.

there are multimillionaires and hedge fund operators who pay an effective tax rate lower than many of the people here. i intend to end that.

so the argument is not whether we have a high quality pre-k system. we must do that. the argument is that we have got to fund it by asking the wealthiest people who are doing phenomenally well to start paying their fair share of taxes.  thank you for that important question. as a nation we should be profoundly embarrassed that we have more people in jail than any other country on earth. we spend $80 billion a year locking up 2.2 million people, disproportionately african-american, latino and native american.

for a thought, what i would propose is when we have unemployment rates of minority kids of 40 or 50 percent, that maybe it makes more sense to invest in jobs and education for those kids rather than jail and incarceration.

second of all, we need to end over-policing, and we need to de-militarize local police departments so they don't look like occupying forces.

thirdly, we need to make police departments reflect the diversity of the communities they serve. number four, we need to make sure that we end private ownership of prisons and detention centers. and very importantly, and secretary clinton and i have a big difference of opinion on this, i think we really need to rethink the war on drugs.

now it turns out that in the last 30 years millions of people have received criminal records because of possession of marijuana. and it turns out also, interestingly enough, that the white community and the black community do marijuana at about equal levels. but blacks are four times more likely to be arrested than whites. so this becomes a racial issue and not just a criminal justice issue.

i would take marijuana out of the federal controlled substance act. well, you know, chris, it's hard. i've cast many, many thousands of votes, and there was one vote where it was almost unanimous in the house on de-regulating derivatives and so forth. i should've voted the other way. i mean, like four people -- you know, i had help lead the effort against de-regulation. that was a bad vote.

but i'll tell you something. as i look back on my voting record, you know, secretary clinton -- and i don't mean to be overly partisan here -- supported doma in 1996, and that is the defense of marriage act, which i think she has since apologized for. it was a homophobic piece of legislation. back then it was not easy to vote against that piece of legislation, all right. i voted against that piece of legislation.

back in the early 1990s, when all of corporate america and all republicans and many democrats were pushing these disastrous trade agreements, nafta and later cafta and permanent noble trade relations with china, i didn't vote for any of them. i helped lead the opposition to them.

so i'm not saying by any means that after thousands of those i did not cast a bad vote. i did. but i will say that time and time again i took on issues and voted -- cast votes that were unpopular at the time but turned out years later -- whether it's the vote against the war in iraq, the vote against trade agreements, voting against doma, voting against the first gulf war. those are votes that i cast. they were not popular votes. those are the votes that i cast, and i'm proud of casting those votes. how many hours do we have to discuss that? i mean, one of the extraordinary things about the experience of running for president is you learn just so, so much, and you meet so many extraordinary people.

we have been -- i have been, obviously, to flint, michigan -- and let me tell you something chris. i will never forget that experience as long as i live talking to a mother who described to me the breakdown of the cognitive capabilities of her daughter because that daughter was drinking poisoned water.

and you ask yourself how that could possibly happen in the united states of america. you've heard me being critical of media more times than one, but i think people in america really don't know, not only what's going on in flint, michigan, they don't know that the detroit public school system is on the verge of a fiscal collapse. they don't know that in baltimore, maryland there are tens of thousands of heroin addicts. they don't know that in inner cities all over this country people are paying 40, 50, 60 percent of their limited incomes for housing, that there is not enough affordable housing. people do not really know what is going on in african-american communities where kids are suffering 40, 50, 60 percent rates of unemployment and what i have learned in this campaign, is if i get elected president we are gonna change national priorities.

we're not just gonna rebuild communities in iraq and afghanistan, we're going to rebuild them in the united states of america.  west virginia, thank you!

what an extraordinary turnout tonight. thanks so much for being here.

i want to thank all of you for being here.

i want to thank all of you for being prepared to stand up, fight back, and make this country the nation we know it can become.

this campaign is not just about electing a president; it is about transforming our nation.

it is about having the courage to demand a political revolution.

and you are the revolutionaries because you understand that unlike football or basketball, politics is not a spectator sport.

so let me tell you a secret that many others will not. you are all – each and every one of you – powerful people if you choose to exercise that power.

the fight that we are waging is not an easy fight. but i know you are prepared to wage that fight against the 1%, against the billionaire class and against a small number of people with incredible wealth and incredible power who control our economic life, our political life, and our media life.

when we began this campaign just about a year ago, we started with no political organization. we started with no money and we had no name recognition outside of vermont.

and i want all of you to get up to vermont and visit our beautiful state.

and when we began this campaign, the media said "well, bernie is a nice guy. he combs his hair really well. top notch dresser. but nonetheless, he really is a fringe candidate. the campaign is a fringe campaign not to be taken seriously."

and in the middle of all of that, we were taking on the most powerful political organization in america – an organization that elected a president – president clinton – on two occasions and ran a very strong campaign for president for secretary clinton in 2008.

and when we began this campaign, we were about 3% in the national polls. we were about 60 points behind secretary clinton. well, a lot has happened in the last year.

as of today, we have now won 16 primaries and caucuses all over this country.

and with your help, we're going to win here in west virginia.

we have won over 1,200 delegates to the democratic national convention.

and in the last several weeks, the national polls – they don't show us 60 points down. a few of them have us actually ahead or a few points down.

and what is also extremely important, if the democratic party is to look at which candidate is the candidate to defeat donald trump or any other republican ...

what we are seeing on national polls which have us 15, 20 points ahead of donald trump -- far more than secretary clinton.

almost -- almost every national poll and every state poll has us defeating trump and that margin for us is significantly larger than that of secretary clinton.

and the reason that we are doing so much better against republican candidates is that not only are we winning that overwhelming majority of democratic votes but we are winning independent votes and some republican votes as well.

and that is a point that i hope the delegates to the democratic convention fully understand. in a general election, everyone -- democrat, independent, republican has the right to vote for president.

the elections are not closed primaries. we were in new york state last week. three million people in new york state could not vote ...

because they were independents. well, you know what? those folks and independents all over this country will be voting in november for the next president of the united states.

and in most cases we win the independent vote by a two to one margin.

this campaign is doing as well as it is with the extraordinary energy and enthusiasm that we are generating all across this country. look at -- look at this room here tonight. we have over 6,000 people.

and the reason that we are generating this enthusiasm is because we are doing something very unusual in contemporary american politics. we are telling the truth.

now, the truth is as every person here knows whether it is in our own personal lives or in our broad national political life -- truth is not always pleasant. it's not always something you are happy to hear but if we go forward as human beings -- if we go forward as a nation we cannot sweep the hard realities of our lives underneath the rug. we got to bring it out, we have to deal with it.

and unfortunately -- unfortunately media in this country for a variety of reasons largely because they're owned by major corporations do not -- do not deal in most cases -- there are great exceptions. but they do not deal with the realities of our lives in a way that we need to be discussing.

now let me -- let me just give you a few examples of what i mean and making it really relevant to life here in west virginia and i've been all over country. i have been all over this country and the things that i have seen are incredibly heartbreaking. i was for flint, michigan where children are being poisoned by lead in the water that they are drinking.

i have been to detroit, michigan where their public school system is on the verge of a fiscal collapse.

i have been to baltimore, maryland where tens of thousands of people are addicted to heroin.

and i know -- i know that addiction is a problem here and we'll get to that in a second. but the point is -- point number one, i want everybody here to know this. never forget it. we are the wealthiest country in the history of the world but most people in our country don't know that because almost all of the new income and wealth is going to the top one percent.

we are the wealthiest country in the history of the world and that means that public school systems should not be collapsing. youth unemployment in this country should not be 30, 40 or 50 percent. our infrastructure should not be disintegrating.

so we as a people have got to ask some very hard questions and then have the guts to take on some very powerful people.

a great nation is not judged by the number of billionaires it has or the number of nuclear weapons it has. it is judged by how it treats the weakest and most vulnerable amongst us.

it is -- it is not acceptable to me that in america we have the highest rate of childhood poverty of almost any major country on earth. that is not the way we should be treating the young people of this country.

and right here in west virginia -- your beautiful state -- 100,000 children in this great state live in poverty. over 24 percent of the total number of kids right here in west virginia.

when we talk about employment, "officially," quote unquote, unemployment in america is supposed to be five percent but you know that that is not the case. real unemployment is much, much higher than that.

in fact -- in fact right here in west virginia this state has the lowest labor force participation rate in the country. in fact, only 54 percent of the working age population in this state has a job.

when we talk about the grotesque level and i talk about this a lot -- when i talk about the grotesque levels of income and wealth inequality, west virginia is almost at the top of that list.

and again -- and again this is a national problem. believe me, it exists in my state of vermont but this is an issue we have got to deal with in every state in this country and listen to this. from 1979 to 2012, the top one percent of the people in west virginia saw their income go up by more than 60 percent on average while the bottom 90 percent saw their income go down ...

go down by four tenths of one percent and that is what we are seeing all over america. we have an economy today that is doing really, really, really great if you're in the top one percent. but if you're in the bottom 90 percent, the likelihood is you're working long hours for lower wages if you're lucky enough to have a job.

and i want everybody here to know this is not just -- i'm using west virginia statistics tonight because i'm here. this is a national issue and that is why together we are going to create an economy that works for all of our people not just the people on top.

couple of years ago i was chairman of a subcommittee in the senate and we did a hearing on poverty as a death sentence. you know what i mean by that?

this is what i mean by that. when you hear about people being poor, people say, "well, that's too bad. they don't have a good car, their housing is really not good. they don't have enough money to go out to eat. it's really bad being poor." being poor is much, much more than that. what being poor is about in america is you die at a significantly lower age than people who have money.

mcdowell county here in west virginia is one of the poorest counties in the united states of america. the united states of america being the richest country in the history of the world. in mcdowell county, 77 percent of the children under 18 are living in poverty in the united states of america.

in mcdowell county, men can only expect to live until the age of 63.

now i want you to think about this. again, being poor means -- it's not just you don't have the big flat screen tv or a fancy car. it means that you are dying at a significantly lower age than your fellow americans. if you drive -- for example -- drive six miles north from this county, you go to fairfax county, virginia. in fairfax county, men live on average until the age of 82 years of age -- 18 years more than men live (sic) in mcdowell county.

the average life expectancy for a women in fairfax county is 85. in mcdowell county it is 73 years of age.

and it's not just mcdowell county. we have counties like that -- maybe not so bad -- all over this country. these are issues of inequality that as a nation we have got to address.

now, you know, one of the issues that i talk about a whole lot and it's directly related to poverty, directly related to unemployment is the fact that we have a broken criminal justice system.

again, what this campaign is asking all of you is to think outside of the box -- think outside of the status quo, think beyond the options that corporate television allow you to envisage.

think about why people in mcdowell county die at a significantly lower age than people in wealthier communities. think about why it is that in city after city in america we have youth unemployment levels of 40, 50, 60 percent and that relates to an international embarrassment that we have more people in jail than any other country on earth.

this is the united states of america. we should have the best educated people in the world.

our people should have decent paying jobs not rot in jail.

now, this campaign is going to win because we are doing something unusual. we are talking to the american people and not just the wealthy campaign contributors.

and when i talk about unpleasant truths that all of us have to address, truth number one is that we have a corrupt campaign finance system which is undermining america democracy.

think outside of the box. what does democracy mean? is it not a complicated complex. it means that you have a vote, you got a vote, you got a vote, majority wins.

democracy does not mean that the coke brothers and a few other billionaires can spend hundreds of millions of dollars to buy elections.

that is not democracy, my friends. that is called oligarchy.

and if we do not turn things around we will increasingly see an economy and a government run by a handful of billionaires and together we will not allow that to happen.

but is it not just -- it is not just a corrupt campaign finance system that we're going to have to address. it is a rigged economy.

and this is what a rigged economy means. it means today and listen to this. this is really pretty unbelievable. the top one tenth of one percent -- not one percent -- one tenth of one percent now owns almost as much wealth as the bottom 90 percent.

in america today, the wealthiest 20 people own more wealth than the bottom half of america -- 150 million people.

in american today, one family -- the waltons family of walmart -- one family owns more wealth than the bottom 40 percent of the american people.

and you know what i say? i say enough is enough.

but it is not only an unfair distribution of wealth. it is income as well. again, i want to say this to the young people who may not believe me and i want you to check it -- google it after you get out of here. not now.

but here is the fact -- 40 years ago before the explosion of technology, before the cell phones and the space age technology and before the global economy it was possible in america for one person -- one breadwinner to earn enough money to take care of the entire family.

one breadwinner could take -- earn enough money to take care of the entire family. well, then you got the whole global economy, all of the technology, you know what happens. today, mom is out working, dad is out working, the kids are out working and they have less disposable income than a one breadwinner family had 40 years ago. something is wrong with our economy.

in america today, in vermont, west virginia, you got people working not one job. they're working two jobs, they're working three jobs. you got people working longer hours for lower wages. we are going to create an economy that protects the needs of our workers, our children, our seniors, our veterans. all of the people of this country and not just the one percent.

now, what does that mean? is that a hard thing to do? no, it's not. let me give you an example of some of what we have got to do. number one, in america if you work 40 hours a week you should not be living in poverty. we're going to raise the minimum wage to $15 an hour.

fifteen bucks an hour will mean that millions of people will be able to support their families with the kind of dignity and security that they do not have today.

and second when we talk about equitable wages we're going to end the absurdity of women making $0.79 on the dollar compared to men ...

and i know that every man here will join the women in the fight for pay equity.

when unemployment rates throughout this country are extremely high especially in urban areas and in rural areas and when people are not making enough income to take care of their family, it is a no brainer to suggest we need a massive federal jobs program to put our people back to work.

in vermont and in west virginia and all over this country our infrastructure, our roads, our bridges, our water systems, our wastewater plants, our rail system, our airports, our levees and dams are in massive disrepair. we can create 13 million jobs with a trillion dollar investment.

well, people say, "yeah. that's a nice idea. yeah. our infrastructure is crumbling. you're right, bernie but how you going to pay for it?" i will tell you how we're going to pay for it. right now we have a corrupt federal tax system which allows major corporations -- major corporations who make billions of dollars a year in profit to stash their profits in the cayman islands, bermuda and in other tax havens.

we're going to end -- we are going to end that tax loophole. a hundred billion a year we invest in the infrastructure, we create the jobs that we need ...

and when we talk about the economy, we've got to talk about something that media almost never talks about. it's not a sexy -- not a sexy issue but an enormously important issue and that is our disastrous trade policies.

again, let me tell the young people something they may not know and that is there was actually once a time not so many years ago when you could go to a department store and buy products manufactured in the united states of america.

but as a result of trade policies like nafta and permanent normal trade relations with china, policies written by corporate america -- what happened is companies shut down plants in vermont, west virginia and all over this country. they said, "why do i want to pay somebody here $15, $20 an hour when i can go to china, mexico, pay people pennies an hour," and that's what they did.

as a result of these terrible trade agreements we have lost millions of decent paying jobs. millions and one of the big differences between secretary clinton and myself -- she supported virtually every one of these disastrous trade agreements. i have opposed them all.

and our message to corporate america is you want us to buy the products you make, make these damn products here in west virginia and in america.

this campaign is going to win because we are listening to people whose voices are not often heard. and one of the groups of people that i have been very proud to listen to all over this country is young people.

it's a funny thing. when we began this campaign, the general attitude of the punditry and the political scientists were, "well, young people, they're not really interested in government. they're not interested in politics. they're too busy with their video games or whatever else they do." well, it turns out that the young people of this country are a lot smarter than many of the pundits thought.

if it turns out -- turns out that the young people understand. they are the future of this country and they want to help shape that future.

and young people understand that there is something profoundly wrong when in this country today the young generation may be the first generation in the modern history of america to have a lower standard of living than their parents.

that's right. my father came to this country at the age of 17 with money. he never made any money but we work hard and my mom worked hard and their dream was that their kids -- my brother and i would be financially better off than they were. that is called the american dream that millions of american families have experienced. parents work hard so their kids can do better than they.

and together -- together that american dream -- that american dream -- we will not allow to die.

there's another issue out there that young people all over the country talk to me about. and they say, "bernie, we did what our parents told us to do, what our teachers told us to do, what our community told us to do and that is go out and get the best education that we can." because we all understand that learning and education is inherent in who we are as human beings and that also for our country to do well in the future we need the best educated work force in the world.

so millions -- millions of young people did the right thing. they went to college but then what happened is they left school 30, 50, $70,000 in debt.

and i have talked to people who are paying off that debt for decades.

they can't afford to buy a car, buy a house, get married, have kids because they're paying off that debt. for what crime did they commit? for getting an education. that is nuts.

all of you know that 40 or 50 years ago if you had a high school degree the likelihood was that you were able to go out and get a halfway decent job and make it into the middle class with a high school degree. but the world has changed, the economy has changed, technology has changed, people today need more education than they did 50 years ago.

and thinking outside of the box, outside of the status quo leads you to a very simple conclusion. fifty years ago it was great that we had free public education from first grade to 12th grade. that was great. but the world has changed and when we talk about public education today it must mean making public colleges and universities tuition free.

now think for a moment there are people who have attacked me on this. oh, saying it's a radical idea, bernie. this is not a radical idea. it exists in countries like germany already and scandinavia. they understand that investing in their young people is investing in the future of their country.

and by the way, you may not know this but 50 years ago in the united states of america our major great public colleges and universities were virtually tuition free. if we could have virtually free tuition 50 years ago, we damn well can do it today.

now, once again -- once again this proposal which by the way also includes dealing with the crisis of student debt today because we have millions of people dealing with student debt and our proposal will allow people with student debt to refinance their loans at the lowest interest rates they can find.

just out of curiosity, how many people here are carrying student debt right now.

ok. all right. we are going to lower than student debt.

now, my critics say, "hey, bernie. you're a nice guy. you're giving out free tuition, you're going to lower student debt. where you going to get the money?" ok. and here is the point. i want you to think again outside of the box. this is not the dynamic that the media provides but you got to think through this stuff and you can. eight, nine years ago as a result of the greed, recklessness and illegal behavior on wall street the congress bailed out the big banks.

apparently -- apparently there was plenty of money available to bail out large banks who were too big to fail. now i believe that right now when wall street is doing quite well thank you that we should impose a tax on wall street speculation.

and that tax alone -- that one tax alone will bring in more than enough money to substantially lower student debt and make public colleges tuition free in this country.

now, wall street may not like it but you know what? i could care less what wall street likes.

and by the way when we make public colleges and universities tuition free we do something that is really revolutionary. i want you to think about this for a second. right now in my state and right here in west virginia you got a lot of kids who grew up, are growing up poor whose parents never went to college and these kids never in a million years can imagine that they will go to college.

but if we can make it clear to the parents and the teachers and the children that any kid in this country who studies hard, who does his or her school work well -- those kids will be able to get a higher education.

that is revolutionary. now i want to touch on an issue that i know is controversial here in west virginia but it's an issue i deal with all over the country and i am not going to tell you anything different than i say in vermont or california.

and that is -- that is that as a member of the u.s. senate committee on the environment i have talked to scientists all over this country and all over the world. and what the scientists tell us almost unanimously is that climate change is real.

climate change is caused by human activity.

and climate change is already causing devastating problems in our country and around the world.

and here's what the scientists also tell and this is scary stuff. what they say is if we do not get our act together and transform our energy system away from fossil fuel then what we will be seeing in years to come is more drought, more flooding, more extreme weather disturbances, more acidification of the ocean, more rising sea levels and more international conflict as people fight over limited natural resources.

and it seems to me that to address this issue we have got to do two things. number one, we have a moral obligation to our kids and future generations to make certain that we leave this planet in a way that is healthy and habitable.

but second of all, we have a moral obligation to protect those workers in the fossil fuel industry.

we cannot leave those people in the coal industry, in the oil industry, in the gas industry high and dry. we cannot go that and that is why ...

that is why we have a moral obligation to make certain that those people who may lose their jobs get new jobs.

and get the education and all of the benefits that they deserve.

when we think outside of the box we have to ask ourselves some simple questions. how does it happen that every major country on earth guarantees health care to all of their people except the united states?

i'm a member of the committee that helped write the affordable care act. they affordable care act has done a lot of good things but -- but today 29 million people have no health insurance still. many of you are underinsured with high co-payments and high deductibles and the drug companies rip us all off by charging us the highest price  ...

and that is why i believe we need to move toward a medicare for all single payer  ...

think -- think about an america where every person as a right has health care. what that means is you will not have to stay on your job if you don't like that job just because you got health care on that job.

think about going to the doctor when you're sick not having to worry about a co-payment or a deductible.

and think about a medicare for all program saving the average family thousands of dollars a year on their health insurance.

and when we talk about health care let me deal very briefly with an issue that is on the minds of all of you in west virginia and in my state of vermont. there is no debate but that we have a tragic crisis in america today with opiate and heroin addiction.

and i know -- i know that it is a serious crisis here but trust me it is a serious crisis in my state as well. and the issue of how we deal with it seems to me to reach the conclusion that we have got to deal with substance abuse and addiction as a health issue, not a criminal issue.

what does that mean? what it means and again think outside of the box. what it means is that we have got to revolutionize mental health treatment in america.

we have got to provide treatment to people when they need it not six months from now.

and on another issue relating to drugs, one of the problems with our criminal justice system is that over the last 30 years millions of people have received criminal records because of possession of marijuana.

and if you have a criminal record you know what? and you're a kid it is hard to go out and get a job. we have got to rethink the so-called war on drugs.

right now -- right now under the federal controlled substance act -- federal controlled substance act marijuana is listed as a schedule i drug next to heroin.

now, scientists argue -- scientists argue the pluses and minuses of marijuana but marijuana is not heroin which is a killer drug.

and that is why i have legislation in that will take marijuana out of the federal controlled substance act.

legalizing -- legalizing marijuana is a state issue. it should not be a federal crime.

everybody here knows a profound lesson of american history and that is that real change never takes place from the top on down. it always takes place from the bottom up.

a hundred years ago when workers in west virginia and all over this country were forced to work seven days a week, 12 hours a day, when kids were working in the mines and in the factories, working people came together to form trade unions so they could have some dignity on the job.

and that's what happens when people come together. a hundred years ago in this country and the kids don't know this -- women did not have the right to vote, did not have the right to get the education or the jobs they wanted less than a hundred years ago.

but what happened? women stood up.

women fought back and with their male allies they said, "you know what? in america, women will not be second class citizens."

hundreds of years ago amidst the abomination of slavery african americans and their allies had a different vision for america. some of them went to jail, some of them died, some of them were beaten but they said that in america we will end racism, segregation and  ...

if we were here in this room 10 years ago which is no time at all from a historical perspective and somebody jumps up and says, "you know, bernie, i think that by the year 2015 gay marriage will be legal in 50 states of this country..."

the person next to him would have said, "you're crazy. not going to happen. not going to happen." but because the gay community and their straight allies were prepared to take on bigotry and hatred we've succeeded in making gay marriage legal.

if we were here five years ago -- five years ago, somebody jumps up and says, "bernie, a $7.25 federal minimum wage is a starvation wage. we have to raise that wage to $15 an hour." the person next to her would have said, "$15 an hour? you want to more than double the minimum wage? you're nuts. you're thinking too big. it can't happen. maybe $8, maybe nine -- 15 -- too high." but you know what happened? workers in the fast food industry in macdonald's, burger king, wendy's went out on strike.

they stood up and they fought back and then two years ago in seattle, los angeles, san francisco, $15 an hour minimum wage.

in oregon, in california, new york state, $15 an hour minimum wage.

what is my point? my point is that ideas today that seem so radical -- raising the minimum wage, making public colleges and universities tuition free, providing health care for all people as a right, having paid family and medical leave ...

ending a corrupt campaign finance system ...

addressing the crisis of climate change, making sure that women are paid equal pay for equal work ...

making sure our kids have jobs not jail cells ...

all of these ideas today they seem radical but they are not radical. they are ideas that in fact are supported by the vast majority of the american people.

but they are not supported by the billionaire class, by wall street and corporate america.

so what this campaign is about is asking millions of people throughout this country -- working people, middle class people, young people, old people, gay people, straight people, black, white, latino, asian-american, native american ...

making certain that the donald trumps of the world do not divide us up.

understanding that when we stand together there is nothing -- nothing that we cannot accomplish.

now, on may 10th there is going to be a very important primary here in west virginia.

and what we have learned in this campaign is when there are large voter turnouts we win. when they are low voter turnouts we lose.

all right. that's what i want to hear.

i hope -- i hope that on may 10th, west virginia will have the largest voter turnout in the history of the state.

and i hope very much that west virginia will join the political revolution. thank you all very much.  hello! thank you! thank you, carson!

let me -- let me begin by thanking all of you. what a fantastic turnout. thank you so much.

and let me thank jim sobel, and nick zano, and francis fisher, and hollis longwear, and adriana aravalo, and gil sedilio, kendrick sampson -- and let me give a special thanks to a very good friend of mine and one of the great actors in our country, danny glover.

danny is not only an extraordinary actor but, as many of you know, he has spent his entire adult life fighting for economic justice, social justice, racial justice. danny, thank you for all that you have done.

let me also take this opportunity to say a word of thanks to the people of kentucky. in a closed primary -- something i am not all that enthusiastic about where independents are not allowed to vote...  ... where secretary clinton defeated barack obama by 250,000 votes in 2008, it ends up tonight we're going to end up with about half of the delegates from kentucky.

i want to thank you all for coming out because this is, in a sense, the beginning of the final push to win california.

when we -- and by the way, i should tell you that there are a lot of people out there -- many of the pundits and politicians -- they say "bernie sanders should drop out."

"the people of california should not have the right to determine who the next president will be."

well, let me be as clear as i can be. i agree with you. we are in until the last ballot is cast.

you know, when we began this campaign a little over a year ago, we were 60 points behind secretary clinton in the polls. we had no political organization, no money, very little name recognition. the media and the pundits determined that we were a fringe candidacy.

and nobody -- nobody thought that this campaign was going anywhere. and on top of all of that, we were taking on the most powerful political organization in the country; an organization that elected bill clinton twice and ran a strong campaign for hillary clinton in 2008.

well, a lot has changed in the last year.

as of today, we have won 19 state primaries and caucuses and over 9 million votes.

no one can predict the future, but i think we have a real shot to win primaries in a number of the states that will be coming up.

and don't tell secretary clinton; she might get nervous. i think we're going to win here in california.

and as all of you know, california has 475 pledged delegates.

and let me mention something else. i am especially proud that in, i believe, every primary and caucus, those we won and those we lost, we have received a significant majority of the votes of young people.

and by the way -- and by the way, one -- you know one of the things about getting older, the older you get, you know -- well, yeah -- people who are older appear to be younger. that's what it is. so, we are winning people 45 years of age or younger and what that tells me is that our vision, a vision of social justice, economic justice, racial justice, and environmental justice, that is the future of this country.

as of today, i am proud to tell you that taking on virtually the entire democratic establishment, almost all of the senators, the members of the house, mayors, governors -- we have won over 45% of the pledged delegates.

and in a couple of weeks if we can win big in new jersey, new mexico, north and south dakota, montana, california, we have the possibility. it will be a steep climb. i recognize that. but we have the possibility of going to philadelphia with the majority of the pledged delegates.

now, some people say that we've got a steep hill to climb to do that, and that is absolutely true. but you know what? together we have been climbing that steep hill from day one in this campaign, and we're going to continue to fight for every last vote until june 14, and then we're going to take our fight into the convention.

you know, there is -- there is a lot of discussion about the role of super-pacs.

and i am very proud to tell you i am the only candidate running for president who does not have a super-pac. we made a decision when we began this campaign that we were not going to beg wall street, or corporate america, or billionaires for campaign contributions. and as of today, without a super-pac, we have received almost 8 million individual campaign contributions. anybody know what that average contribution is? that's right, $27. and what that shows the world, in a time when big money is dominating our political process, is that you can run a strong, winning national campaign without begging billionaires for campaign contributions.

let me -- let me also mention something that a lot of people may not be aware of and that is that virtually every national and state poll taken in the last six weeks -- in all of those polls, we are defeating donald trump.

and not only are we defeating trump, in most cases by double digits, in almost every case, whether -- in almost every case, whether it is a national poll or state poll, we do much better against trump then does secretary clinton.

a poll just came out -- i think it was yesterday in the state of georgia -- not a very good state for us -- trump was beating secretary clinton by four points, and we were beating him by five points.

if the democratic -- if the democratic party wants to be certain that donald trump is defeated -- and that we must do -- we, together, are the campaign to do that. and it is not just -- it is not just the polls -- the polls go up, the polls go down. what it is, is that our campaign has the energy and the enthusiasm and the grassroots capability.

the grassroots capability to make certain that in november, in the general election, we have a huge voter turnout. here is a political truism: when the voter turnout is low, and people are demoralized and don't come out to vote, republicans win. when there is excitement, and energy, and people are prepared to stand up and fight back, progressives and democrats win -- that is our campaign.

i don't have to explain to anybody here that the american people will not elect a candidate like donald trump who insults mexicans and latinos.

who insults muslims; who insults women and veterans; and who is a leader of the so-called birther movement, tries to delegitimize the presidency of our first african-american president.

we will not accept as president a man who wants to give hundreds of billions of dollars in tax breaks to billionaire families like his, but who has told us that we do not have to worry about raising the starvation minimum wage of $7.25 an hour. we will not accept a president who recklessly talks about using nuclear weapons and who changes his mind every day on every issue.

let me also say a word to the leadership of the democratic party. and that is -- that is -- that the democratic party is going to have to make a very, very profound and important decision. it can do the right thing and open its doors and welcome into the party people who are prepared to fight for real economic and social change.

that is the democratic party i want to see, bringing in people who are willing to take on wall street; to take on corporate greed; and to take on a fossil fuel industry which is destroying this planet. so i say to the leadership of the democratic party, open the door, let the people in.

or, the other option -- the other option for the democratic party, which i see as a very sad and tragic option, is the truce to maintain its status quo structure, remain dependent on big money campaign contributions, and be a party with limited participation and limited energy; and a party which, incredibly, is allowing a right- wing extremist republican party to capture the votes of a majority of working people in this country. now, i come from the working class of this country, and i will be damned -- i will be damned if we will allow the republican party, whose job is to represent the rich and the powerful, to win the votes of working-class americans. let me say a word about why i think this campaign is doing so well. you know why? because we are doing something very unusual. we are telling the american people the truth.

and here is a very important truth. if we as a nation do not get our act together, this great nation is going to slip into in oligarchic form of society, where a handful of billionaires control our political and economic life. let me tell you how absurd it is. it was just announced the other day, the koch brothers -- the second wealthiest family in america, a family worth tens of billions of dollars, extremely right-wing -- are contributing over $40 million to try and make the united states senate stay republican; $40 million. and here is what is even crazier -- a guy named sheldon adelson, also one of the wealthiest people in america -- this is a billionaire who is prepared to contribute huge sums of money to another billionaire, named donald trump. the american people are sick and tired of billionaires running our economy and our political lives.

together, we are going to overturn this disastrous citizens united supreme court decision, and we are going to move toward public funding of elections. i want this country to be a vibrant democracy, and that means whether you're progressive, conservative, or moderate, if you want to run for office, you should not have to beg millionaires for campaign contributions.

i want this country to have one of the highest voter turnout rates in the world, not one of the lowest. but before we will have the opportunity to defeat donald trump, we are going to have to defeat secretary clinton.

a campaign is about issues and ideas, and let me very briefly and straight-forwardly tell you some of the differences between secretary clinton and myself:

number one, i am proud to tell you i don't have a super-pac and i don't get money from wall street. secretary clinton has a number of super-pacs, and in the last filing period, reported receiving $15 million from wall street. our job is to take on wall street, not take their money.

federal minimum wage of $7.25 is a starvation wage. secretary clinton wants to raise that to $12 an hour. that is ok. but it is not good enough.

hold that sign up, let everybody see it. we are talking about a fight for $15 an hour. i am proud to tell you, i have been on the picket line with those workers. they are standing up and fighting for a living wage, and all of us will stand with them.

my wife just tells me that cnn has called oregon for bernie sanders.

we won. you know, we won a great victory in the state of washington a few months ago. we just won oregon.

and we are going to win california.

i am getting to like the west coast.

this campaign -- when we talk about equitable wages, it is not just that -- you know, raising the minimum wage to a living wage. it is also ending the disgrace of women making $.79 on the dollar compared to men. and together, i know that every man here will stand with the women in the fight for pay equity.

i am a member of the u.s. senate committee on the environment and i will tell you what all of you know, and that is that climate change is real. it is caused by human activity and, as everybody in california knows, it is already causing devastating problems. you in california have witnessed the devastating impact of climate change with your own eyes. you have seen historic wildfires, which scorched 118,000 acres of land here in california in 2014. you have seen massive mudslides; you have seen rising sea levels; you experienced a massive heatwave in 2006. we have a moral obligation -- a moral obligation to transform our energy system away from fossil fuels...  ... to energy efficiency and sustainable energy.

in my view, if we are prepared to be aggressive in transforming our energy system, we need a tax on carbon. we cannot allow, with impunity, the fossil fuel industry to destroy our planet. i believe in a tax on carbon because i see climate change as one of the great global crises that we face. secretary clinton does not support a tax on carbon.

one of the great crises that we are beginning to see unfold is whether or not, in our country and around the world, we will have the clean drinking water that our people need. and that is why i believe we should move for a ban on fracking.

that is my view. unfortunately, it is not secretary clinton's view. in fact -- in fact, when she was secretary of state, she pushed fracking technology onto countries around the world.

the great -- the great foreign policy debate -- the most important debate that we have had in the modern history of our country centered around iraq, and whether to go into iraq. i listened very carefully to what president bush, and dick cheney, and the others had to say. i voted against that war.

secretary clinton voted for that war.

i believe that when you have a handful of large financial institutions on wall street -- institutions who have a business model of fraud; institutions which through their illegal behavior and their greed drove this country into the worst economic downturn since the great depression -- i believe that now is the time to break them up!

that is my view. that is not secretary clinton's view.

one of the reasons that the middle class of this country has been in decline for the last 35 years has to do with a disastrous trade policy which has ended up shutting down thousands of factories in america, as companies shut down here -- the workers out on the street -- and move to china and other low-wage countries.

i voted against every one of those disastrous trade agreements.

secretary clinton supported almost all of them.

what this campaign is about is whether or not we are going to create an economy that works for all of us, or an economy that continues to work for the 1 percent.

it is not acceptable to me that in america today we have more income and wealth inequality than any other major country on earth. it is worse now than at any time since 1928. it is not acceptable that the top one-tenth of 1 percent now owns almost as much wealth as the bottom 90 percent. it is not acceptable to me that in my state of vermont, and here in california, and all over this country, we have millions of people who are working not one job, but two jobs and three jobs to cobble together the income and health care they need. and yet, when mom works, dad works, and the kids work, it adds up that 58 percent of all new income goes to the top 1 percent. that is not acceptable.

this campaign is listening to the american people, and not just to wealthy campaign contributors.

this campaign is listening to young people.

and young people are asking me "how does it happen that when they do the right thing, when they go out and get the best education they can, they end up $30,000, $50,000, $70,000 in debt?"

we should not be punishing people for getting an education; we should reward them.

forty or 50 years ago, if you had a high school degree, you were in pretty good shape. you could go out and get yourself a good job. those days, by and large, are gone. we have a changing economy, changing technology, and a changing global economy. we need to have the best educated workforce in the world.

and that means that when we think about public education, it is not good enough now just to think about first grade through 12th grade. we need to make public colleges and universities tuition free.

i want every kid in california in the fourth grade, and in sixth grade -- kids in vermont -- to understand that if they study hard and take school seriously, no matter what the income their family is, they will be able to get a college education.

how many people here are carrying student debt right now?

i have talked to people all over this country -- people $50,000, 100,000 -- $100,000 in debt. for what crime did they commit? that they went out and got a decent education? that is crazy stuff. so we are going to give people with student debt the right to refinance their loans at the lowest interest rate they can find.

and people say -- you know, my critics say "well, bernie, you're santa claus. you're giving away free tuition; you're going to lower student debt; how are going to you pay for it? i will tell you exactly how we will pay for it. in 2009, congress, against my vote, bailed out the crooks on wall street. today, wall street is doing just fine, and i think it is appropriate to impose a tax on wall street speculations.

and that tax will more than pay for free tuition and public colleges and universities and in lowering student debt.

now, wall street does not like that idea, and i say, so what?

if we win this election, wall street and the other people who now run this country, are going to learn a very profound lesson. and that is, they will not continue to get it all.

i am sick and tired of the greed of corporate america and the greed of wall street. we need a new moral compass in this country.

you know, pope francis talks about a moral economy -- a moral economy, and i agree with him. that is what we need.

this campaign is listening to our latino brothers and sisters.

my father -- my father came to this country at the age of 17 without a nickel in his pocket, so i know a little bit about the immigrant experience.

there are 11 million undocumented people in this country today. many of them are being exploited on the job because when you don't have legal rights -- when you don't have legal rights, you can't stand up and protect yourself. and that is why i believe we must pass comprehensive immigration reform and a path to citizenship.

and that is why i believe we must stop, immediately, the current deportation policy. and if congress does not do its job, i will use the executive powers of the presidency to do it right.

this campaign is listening to our brothers and sisters in the african-american community.

and they are asking me a very simple but important question; how does it happen that this country has trillions of dollars to spend on a war in iraq we never should have gotten into, but, somehow, we don't have the available funds to rebuild our inner cities?

i have been to flint, michigan and visited with parents whose children have been poisoned by lead in the water.

i have been to detroit, michigan where their public school system is on the verge of a physical collapse.

i have been to baltimore, maryland where tens of thousands of people are addicted to drugs and do not have the treatment available to get them off that heroin.

we, as a nation, together, are going to change our national priorities.

we are going to rebuild our inner cities, build affordable housing, and create decent schools for our children.

and this campaign is listening to people whose pain is almost never heard, and that is our native american brothers and sisters.

we owe the first americans a debt of gratitude that we can never repay. they have taught us so much, including the very important lesson that as human beings -- all of us are part of nature. we must live with nature.

and, we cannot continue to destroy nature, because if we destroy nature, we are destroying ourselves.

together, this campaign, and our presidency are going to reform a broken criminal justice system.

it is not acceptable, i believe, to any of us, that we have 2.2 million people in jail today, more than any other country on earth.

instead of seeing kids around this country in inner cities or rural america, experiencing 40 percent, 50 percent unemployment rates, we are going to put those kids to work in good jobs. and we are going to invest in education for them, not jail or incarceration.

we want this country to be the best-educated country on earth, not the country with more people in jail.

what this campaign is about is thinking outside of the box, outside of the status quo. every other major country on earth, whether it's the united kingdom, france, germany, scandinavia, canada -- every major country guarantees health care to all of their people as a right.

the affordable care act has done some very good things, but we have a lot more to do. i believe, from the deepest part of my soul, that health care is a right, not a privilege.

today, we have 29 million peoples with no insurance, even more who are underinsured, with large deductibles and copayments. and every one of us is getting ripped off by the greed of the drug companies.

pharmaceutical industries charge us by far the highest prices in the world for the medicine we need. by the way, on the ballot in november here in california, you are going to have a proposition making sure that california can control the outrageously high cost of prescription drugs.

i congratulate those people who put that item on the ballot -- let's pass it.

together, we will end the fact that we are the only country -- major country without health care for all -- that we pay far more per capita for health care than any other country. we are going to end that by passing a medicare-for-all health care system.

now, the insurance companies may not like it; the drug companies may not like it. but the american people do like it, and that's what we've got to do.

this campaign understands a very, very important historical lesson. that lesson is that no real change has ever occurred in our country from the top on down. it has always been from the bottom on up.

think back -- think back 120 years ago, when workers in this country were forced to work seven days a week, 14 hours a day. they had no rights on the job. think about the children -- 10, 11 years of age, losing fingers in factories, and what the working people of this country said. sorry, we are human beings, we are not beasts of burden. we are going to form trade unions and negotiate contracts.

and i thank the trade union movement for creating the american middle class.

think about 150 years ago, in the midst of the abomination of slavery. there were african americans and their allies who were prepared to go to jail to get beaten, to get lynched, who stood up and said that they will come in this country when we will end racism, and bigotry, and segregation.

and over the years, millions of people were engaged in that struggle. think about where we were as a country 100 years ago -- not such a long time ago. 100 years ago, women in america did not have the right to vote. they could not get the education or the job they wanted. but women stood up and fought back.

women stood up to the establishment, which said to them "your job is to stay home and have babies."

but women said "you will not define us. we will define ourselves."

and women and their male allies said loudly and clearly "women in america will not be second-class citizens."

if we were here ten years ago -- no time at all -- somebody jumps up and says "you know bernie, i think that, say, by the year 2015, gay marriage will be legal in every state in this country."

if somebody said that, the person next to them would have said "you are nuts." what happened? but what happened is the gay community and their straight allies stood up against incredible bigotry.

against all kinds of abuse. and they said together that in this country, people should have the right to love whoever they want, regardless of their gender.

and let me give you a more contemporary example. if five years ago, somebody here stood up and said "bernie, this $7.25 minimum wage, that's really awful and terrible, we've got to raise it to 15 bucks an hour", the person next to him what have said "$15 an hour? you are nuts. you are thinking too radically. you are an extremist." but then, what happened? we've got some of them here -- workers in the fast food industry went out on strike.

workers -- workers in mcdonalds, and in burger king, and in wendy's and subway, and in all these places, they told their community and they told the world they cannot live on $7.25 an hour. and you know what happened after the strikes and demonstrations in seattle, here in los angeles, in san francisco? fifteen dollars an hour.

and if i have anything to say about it -- and i will as president -- $15 an hour in every state in this country.

what is my point? here is my point. throughout -- let me kick off my point, but i want to......i want you to think about this: throughout history -- throughout history, people looked around them. if they were a worker, working seven days a week with no power, they saw that as being unjust, unfair. they stood up and they fought back. in the days of terrible segregation and slavery, people said "america will not be racist." women fought back. the gay community fought back. low income workers fought back. that's what change is about.

and right now -- right now, from coast-to-coast -- and i have been from maine to california -- i have seen millions of people looking around them, and they're saying "wait a second, what is going on in our country where we have such a grotesque level of income and wealth inequality, and almost all new income and wealth is going to the top 1 percent? what is going on when the middle class continues to disappear, and we have more children -- we have a higher rate of childhood poverty that almost any country on earth? what is going on when we are the only major country on earth not to guarantee paid family and medical leave? not to guarantee health care to all people? what is going on when women are making 79 cents on the dollar?"

and when young people are leaving school $50,000 in debt.

though what the establishment wants you to believe is that real change effectively dealing with these issues is impossible -- it's too big, it's too radical.

the options they want to give you -- the media wants to give you, congress wants to give you -- should we cut food stamps or should we cut education?

we do not accept those choices. we're going to ask...

at a time of massive income and wealth inequality -- yeah, we are going to tell the wealthiest people in largest corporations, they are going to start paying their fair share in taxes.

if the american people are prepared to reject the donald trumps of the world who want to divide us up -- they want to divide us up -- but if we stand together as black, and white, and latino, and asian american, and native american; if we stand together as gay and straight, male and female...

if we stand together as people born in this country and people who come into this country.

if we stand together and have the courage to take on the billionaire class -- to demand a government which represents all of us and not just the 1 percent -- together there is nothing we cannot accomplish.

as all of you know, in a few weeks there is going to be of an enormously important primary here in california.

and what i have found throughout this campaign is that we win primaries and caucuses when the voter turnout is high. we lose when it is low. let us have, in the california democratic primary, the largest voter turnout in the history of the state.

and let this great state show the world that you are prepared to help lead our nation into the political revolution. thank you very much. good evening.

how great it is to be with you tonight.

let me begin by thanking the hundreds of thousands of americans who actively participated in our campaign as volunteers. let me thank the 2 1/2 million americans who helped fund our campaign with an unprecedented 8 million individual campaign contributions—averaging $27 a piece. let me thank the 13 million americans who voted for the political revolution, giving us the 1,846 pledged delegates here tonight—46 percent of the total. and delegates: thank you for being here, and for all the work you've done. i look forward to your votes during the roll call on tuesday night.

and let me offer a special thanks to the people of my own state of vermont who have sustained me and supported me as a mayor, congressman, senator and presidential candidate. and to my family—my wife jane, four kids and seven grandchildren –thank you very much for your love and hard work on this campaign.

i understand that many people here in this convention hall and around the country are disappointed about the final results of the nominating process. i think it's fair to say that no one is more disappointed than i am. but to all of our supporters—here and around the country—i hope you take enormous pride in the historical accomplishments we have achieved.

together, my friends, we have begun a political revolution to transform america and that revolution—our revolution—continues. election days come and go. but the struggle of the people to create a government which represents all of us and not just the 1 percent—a government based on the principles of economic, social, racial and environmental justice—that struggle continues. and i look forward to being part of that struggle with you.

let me be as clear as i can be. this election is not about, and has never been about, hillary clinton, or donald trump, or bernie sanders or any of the other candidates who sought the presidency. this election is not about political gossip. it's not about polls. it's not about campaign strategy. it's not about fundraising. it's not about all the things the media spends so much time discussing.

this election is about—and must be about—the needs of the american people and the kind of future we create for our children and grandchildren.

this election is about ending the 40-year decline of our middle class the reality that 47 million men, women and children live in poverty. it is about understanding that if we do not transform our economy, our younger generation will likely have a lower standard of living then their parents.

this election is about ending the grotesque level of income and wealth inequality that we currently experience, the worst it has been since 1928. it is not moral, not acceptable and not sustainable that the top one-tenth of one percent now own almost as much wealth as the bottom 90 percent, or that the top 1 percent in recent years has earned 85 percent of all new income. that is unacceptable. that must change.

this election is about remembering where we were 7 1/2 years ago when president obama came into office after eight years of republican trickle-down economics.

the republicans want us to forget that as a result of the greed, recklessness and illegal behavior on wall street, our economy was in the worst economic downturn since the great depression. some 800,000 people a month were losing their jobs. we were running up a record-breaking deficit of $1.4 trillion and the world's financial system was on the verge of collapse.

we have come a long way in the last 7 1/2 years, and i thank president obama and vice president biden for their leadership in pulling us out of that terrible recession.

yes, we have made progress, but i think we can all agree that much, much more needs to be done.

this election is about which candidate understands the real problems facing this country and has offered real solutions—not just bombast, fear-mongering, name-calling and divisiveness.

we need leadership in this country which will improve the lives of working families, the children, the elderly, the sick and the poor. we need leadership which brings our people together and makes us stronger—not leadership which insults latinos, muslims, women, african-americans and veterans—and divides us up.

by these measures, any objective observer will conclude that—based on her ideas and her leadership—hillary clinton must become the next president of the united states. the choice is not even close.

this election is about a single mom i saw in nevada who, with tears in her eyes, told me that she was scared to death about the future because she and her young daughter were not making it on the $10.45 an hour she was earning. this election is about that woman and the millions of other workers in this country who are struggling to survive on totally inadequate wages.

hillary clinton understands that if someone in america works 40 hours a week, that person should not be living in poverty. she understands that we must raise the minimum wage to a living wage. and she is determined to create millions of new jobs by rebuilding our crumbling infrastructure—our roads, bridges, water systems and wastewater plants.

but her opponent—donald trump—well, he has a very different view. he does not support raising the federal minimum wage of $7.25 an hour—a starvation wage. while donald trump believes in huge tax breaks for billionaires, he believes that states should actually have the right to lower the minimum wage below $7.25. what an outrage!

this election is about overturning citizens united, one of the worst supreme court decisions in the history of our country. that decision allows the wealthiest people in america, like the billionaire koch brothers, to spend hundreds of millions of dollars buying elections and, in the process, undermine american democracy.

hillary clinton will nominate justices to the supreme court who are prepared to overturn citizens united and end the movement toward oligarchy in this country. her supreme court appointments will also defend a woman's right to choose, workers' rights, the rights of the lgbt community, the needs of minorities and immigrants and the government's ability to protect the environment.

if you don't believe this election is important, if you think you can sit it out, take a moment to think about the supreme court justices that donald trump would nominate and what that would mean to civil liberties, equal rights and the future of our country.

this election is about the thousands of young people i have met who have left college deeply in debt, and the many others who cannot afford to go to college. during the primary campaign, secretary clinton and i both focused on this issue but with different approaches. recently, however, we have come together on a proposal that will revolutionize higher education in america. it will guarantee that the children of any family this country with an annual income of $125,000 a year or less—83 percent of our population—will be able to go to a public college or university tuition free. that proposal also substantially reduces student debt.

this election is about climate change, the greatest environmental crisis facing our planet, and the need to leave this world in a way that is healthy and habitable for our kids and future generations. hillary clinton is listening to the scientists who tell us that—unless we act boldly and transform our energy system in the very near future—there will be more drought, more floods, more acidification of the oceans, more rising sea levels. she understands that when we do that we can create hundreds of thousands of good-paying jobs.

donald trump? well, like most republicans, he chooses to reject science. he believes that climate change is a "hoax," no need to address it. hillary clinton understands that a president's job is to worry about future generations, not the short-term profits of the fossil fuel industry.

this campaign is about moving the united states toward universal health care and reducing the number of people who are uninsured or under-insured. hillary clinton wants to see that all americans have the right to choose a public option in their health care exchange. she believes that anyone 55 years or older should be able to opt in to medicare and she wants to see millions more americans gain access to primary health care, dental care, mental health counseling and low-cost prescription drugs through a major expansion of community health centers.

and what is donald trump's position on health care? no surprise there. same old, same old republican contempt for working families. he wants to abolish the affordable care act, throw 20 million people off of the health insurance they currently have and cut medicaid for lower-income americans.

hillary clinton also understands that millions of seniors, disabled vets and others are struggling with the outrageously high cost of prescription drugs and the fact that americans pay the highest prices in the world for their medicine. she knows that medicare must negotiate drug prices with the pharmaceutical industry and that drug companies should not be making billions in profits while one in five americans are unable to afford the medicine they need. the greed of the drug companies must end.

this election is about the leadership we need to pass comprehensive immigration reform and repair a broken criminal justice system. it's about making sure that young people in this country are in good schools and at good jobs, not in jail cells. hillary clinton understands that we have to invest in education and jobs for our young people, not more jails or incarceration.

in these stressful times for our country, this election must be about bringing our people together, not dividing us up. while donald trump is busy insulting one group after another, hillary clinton understands that our diversity is one of our greatest strengths. yes. we become stronger when black and white, latino, asian-american, native american—all of us—stand together. yes. we become stronger when men and women, young and old, gay and straight, native born and immigrant fight to create the kind of country we all know we can become.

it is no secret that hillary clinton and i disagree on a number of issues. that's what this campaign has been about. that's what democracy is about. but i am happy to tell you that at the democratic platform committee there was a significant coming together between the two campaigns and we produced, by far, the most progressive platform in the history of the democratic party. among many other strong provisions, the democratic party now calls for breaking up the major financial institutions on wall street and the passage of a 21st century glass-steagall act. it also calls for strong opposition to job-killing free trade agreements like the trans-pacific partnership.

our job now is to see that platform implemented by a democratic senate, a democratic house and a hillary clinton presidency—and i am going to do everything i can to make that happen.

i have known hillary clinton for 25 years. i remember her as a great first lady who broke precedent in terms of the role that a first lady was supposed to play as she helped lead the fight for universal health care. i served with her in the united states senate and know her as a fierce advocate for the rights of children.

hillary clinton will make an outstanding president and i am proud to stand with her here tonight.
