good to see you.
thank you.
thank you so much, president falwell. god bless liberty university.
i am thrilled to join you today at the largest christian university in the world.
today i want to talk with you about the promise of america.

imagine your parents when they were children. imagine a little girl growing up in wilmington, delaware during world war ii, the daughter of irish and italian catholic family, working class. her uncle ran numbers in wilmington. she grew up with dozens of cousins because her mom was the second youngest of 17 kids. she had a difficult father, a man who drank far too much, and frankly didn’t think that women should be educated.
and yet this young girl, pretty and shy, was driven, was bright, was inquisitive, and she became the first person in her family ever to go to college. in 1956, my mom, eleanor, graduated from rice university with a degree in math and became a pioneering computer programmer in the 1950s and 1960s.
imagine a teenage boy, not much younger than many of you here today, growing up in cuba. jet black hair, skinny as a rail.
involved in student council, and yet cuba was not at a peaceful time. the dictator, batista, was corrupt, he was oppressive. and this teenage boy joins a revolution. he joins a revolution against batista, he begins fighting with other teenagers to free cuba from the dictator. this boy at age 17 finds himself thrown in prison, finds himself tortured, beaten. and then at age 18, he flees cuba, he comes to america.
imagine for a second the hope that was in his heart as he rode that ferry boat across to key west, and got on a greyhound bus to head to austin, texas to begin working, washing dishes, making 50 cents an hour, coming to the one land on earth that has welcomed so many millions.

when my dad came to america in 1957, he could not have imagined what lay in store for him. imagine a young married couple, living together in the 1970s, neither one of them has a personal relationship with jesus. they have a little boy and they are both drinking far too much. they are living a fast life.

when i was three, my father decided to leave my mother and me. we were living in calgary at the time, he got on a plane and he flew back to texas, and he decided he didn’t want to be married anymore and he didn’t want to be a father to his 3-year-old son. and yet when he was in houston, a friend, a colleague from the oil and gas business invited him to a bible study, invited him to clay road (ph) baptist church, and there my father gave his life to jesus christ.
and god transformed his heart. and he drove to the airport, he bough a plane ticket, and he flew back to be with my mother and me.

there are people who wonder if faith is real. i can tell you, in my family there’s not a second of doubt, because were it not for the transformative love of jesus christ, i would have been saved and i would have been raised by a single mom without my father in the household.

imagine another little girl living in africa, in kenya and nigeria. that’s a diverse crowd.
playing with kids, they spoke swahili, she spoke english. coming back to california.
where her parents who had been missionaries in africa raised her on the central coast. she starts a small business when she’s in grade school baking bread. she calls it heidi’s bakery. she and her brother compete baking bread. they bake thousands of loaves of bread and go to the local apple orchard where they sell the bread to people coming to pick apples. she goes on to a career in business, excelling and rising to the highest pinnacles, and then heidi becomes my wife and my very best friend in the world.
heidi becomes an incredible mom to our two precious little girls, caroline and catherine, the joys and loves of our life.
imagine another teenage boy being raised in houston, hearing stories from his dad about prison and torture in cuba, hearing stories about how fragile liberty is, beginning to study the united states constitution, learning about the incredible protections we have in this country that protect the god-given liberty of every american. experiencing challenges at home.

in the 1980s, oil prices crater and his parents business go bankrupt. heading off to school over a thousand miles away from home, in a place where he knew nobody, where he was alone and scared, and his parents going through bankruptcy meant there was no financial support at home, so at the age of 17, he went to get two jobs to help pay his way through school.
he took over $100,000 in school loans, loans i suspect a lot of ya’ll can relate to, loans that i’ll point out i just paid off a few years ago.
these are all of our stories. these are who we are as americans.

and yet, for so many americans, the promise of america seems more and more distant. what is the promise of america? the idea that -- the revolutionary idea that this country was founded upon, which is that our rights don’t come from man. they come from god almighty.
and that the purpose of the constitution, as thomas jefferson put it, is to serve as chains to bind the mischief of government.
the incredible opportunity of the american dream, what has enabled millions of people from all over the world to come to america with nothing and to achieve anything. and then the american exceptionalism that has made this nation a clarion voice for freedom in the world, a shining city on a hill.
that’s the promise of america. that is what makes this nation an indispensable nation, a unique nation in the history of the world.

and yet, so many fear that that promise is today unattainable. so many fear it is slipping away from our hands.

i want to talk to you this morning about reigniting the promise of america: 240 years ago on this very day, a 38-year-old lawyer named patrick henry...... stood up just a hundred miles from here in richmond, virginia...... and said, “give me liberty or give me death.”
 i want to ask each of you to imagine, imagine millions of courageous conservatives, all across america, rising up together to say in unison “we demand our liberty.”
 today, roughly half of born again christians aren’t voting. they’re staying home. imagine instead millions of people of faith all across america coming out to the polls and voting our values.
 today millions of young people are scared, worried about the future, worried about what the future will hold. imagine millions of young people coming together and standing together, saying “we will stand for liberty.”
 think just how different the world would be. imagine instead of economic stagnation, booming economic growth.
 instead of small businesses going out of business in record numbers, imagine small businesses growing and prospering. imagine young people coming out of school with four, five, six job offers.
 imagine innovation thriving on the internet as government regulators and tax collectors are kept at bay and more and more opportunity is created.
 imagine america finally becoming energy self-sufficient as millions and millions of high-paying jobs are created.
 five years ago today, the president signed obamacare into law.
 within hours, liberty university went to court filing a lawsuit to stop that failed law.
 instead of the joblessness, instead of the millions forced into part-time work, instead of the millions who’ve lost their health insurance, lost their doctors, have faced skyrocketing health insurance premiums, imagine in 2017 a new president signing legislation repealing every word of obamacare.
 imagine health care reform that keeps government out of the way between you and your doctor and that makes health insurance personal and portable and affordable.

instead of a tax code that crushes innovation, that imposes burdens on families struggling to make ends met, imagine a simple flat tax...

... that lets every american fill out his or her taxes on a postcard.

imagine abolishing the irs.

instead of the lawlessness and the president’s unconstitutional executive amnesty, imagine a president that finally, finally, finally secures the borders.

and imagine a legal immigration system that welcomes and celebrates those who come to achieve the american dream.

instead of a federal government that wages an assault on our religious liberty, that goes after hobby lobby, that goes after the little sisters of the poor, that goes after liberty university, imagine a federal government that stands for the first amendment rights of every american.

instead of a federal government that works to undermine our values, imagine a federal government that works to defend the sanctity of human life...

... and to uphold the sacrament of marriage.

instead of a government that works to undermine our second amendment rights, that seeks to ban our ammunition...

... imagine a federal government that protects the right to keep and bear arms of all law-abiding americans.

instead of a government that seizes your e-mails and your cell phones, imagine a federal government that protected the privacy rights of every american.

instead of a federal government that seeks to dictate school curriculum through common core...

... imagine repealing every word of common core.

imagine embracing school choice as the civil rights issue of the next generation...

... that every single child, regardless of race, regardless of ethnicity, regardless of wealth or zip code, every child in america has the right to a quality education.

and that’s true from all of the above, whether is public schools, or charter schools, or private schools, or christian schools, or parochial schools, or home schools, every child.

instead of a president who boycotts prime minister netanyahu, imagine a president who stands unapologetically with the nation of israel.

instead of a president who seeks to go to the united nations to end-run congress and the american people...

imagine a president who says “i will honor the constitution, and under no circumstances will iran be allowed to acquire a nuclear weapon.”

imagine a president who says “we will stand up and defeat radical islamic terrorism...”

“... and we will call it by its name.”

“we will defend the united states of america.”

now, all of these seem difficult, indeed to some they may seem unimaginable, and yet if you look in the history of our country, imagine it’s 1775, and you and i were sitting there in richmond listening to patrick henry say give me liberty or give me death.

imagine it’s 1776 and we were watching the 54 signers of the declaration of independence stand together and pledge their lives, their fortunes, and their sacred honor to igniting the promise of america.

imagine it was 1777 and we were watching general washington as he lost battle, after battle, after battle in the freezing cold as his soldiers with no shoes were dying, fighting for freedom against the most powerful army in the world. that, too, seemed unimaginable.

imagine it’s 1933 and we were listening to president franklin delano roosevelt tell america at a time of crushing depression, at a time of a gathering storm abroad, that we have nothing to fear but fear itself.

imagine it’s 1979 and you and i were listening to ronald reagan.

and he was telling us that we would cut the top marginal tax rates from 70 percent all the way down to 28 percent, that we would go from crushing stagnation to booming economic growth, to millions being lifted out of poverty and into prosperity abundance. that the very day that he was sworn in, our hostages who were languishing in iran would be released. and that within a decade we would win the cold war and tear the berlin wall to the ground.

that would have seemed unimaginable, and yet, with the grace of god, that’s exactly what happened.
from the dawn of this country, at every stage america has enjoyed god’s providential blessing. over and over again, when we face impossible odds, the american people rose to the challenge. you know, compared to that, repealing obamacare and abolishing the irs ain’t all that tough.

the power of the american people when we rise up and stand for liberty knows no bounds.
if you’re ready to join a grassroots army across this nation, coming together and standing for liberty, i’m going to ask you to break a rule here today and to take out your cell phones, and to text the word constitution to the number 33733. you can also text imagine. we’re versatile.
once again, text constitution to 33733. god’s blessing has been on america from the very beginning of this nation, and i believe god isn’t done with america yet.
i believe in you. i believe in the power of millions of courageous conservatives rising up to reignite the promise of america, and that is why today i am announcing that i’m running for president of the united states.
it is a time for truth. it is a time for liberty. it is a time to reclaim the constitution of the united states.
i am honored to stand with each and every one of you courageous conservatives as we come together to reclaim the promise of america, to reclaim the mandate, the hope and opportunity for our children and our children’s children. we stand together for liberty.
this is our fight. the answer will not come from washington. it will come only from the men and women across this country, from men and women, from people of faith, from lovers of liberty, from people who respect the constitution.
it will only come as it has come at every other time of challenge in this country, when the american people stand together and say we will get back to the principles that have made this country great. we will get back and restore that shining city on a hill that is the united states of america.

thank you and god bless you.
god bless aipac. i'm thrilled to be with you here today and let me say at the outset, perhaps to the surprise of a previous speaker, palestine has not existed since 1948.

on wednesday night of this week, in synagogues across the world, jewish people will read the megillah, which tells the story of purim, the miraculous rescue of the jewish people from the hands of a wicked persian king. when the evildoer haman plots to kill the jews, he describes them as a nation that is scattered and spread out. the talmud teaches that the jewish people at the time were divided amongst themselves and that the lesson is that when the forces of good are divided, evil can prevail. but when we come together in unity, together we can defeat tyrants.

today, we are reliving history, facing a similar time of challenge for america and for israel. but today, i give you a word of hope, in the next few months, we will bring this country together. first by unifying the republican party and then by reaching out and building a coalition of young people, and hispanics, and african americans and women and blue collar workers and jewish voters and reagan democrats which will lead to a commanding victory in november that unifies this country and brings us together.

and standing together, america will stand with israel and defeat radical islamic terrorism.

i want to thank the delegates, the over 18,000 people here, the 4,000 young people, the leaders of the pro-israel movement who are gathered here today. you will play a critical leadership role in making this happen and bringing us together, indeed. just today, my colleague lindsey graham very kindly hosted an event for me here, which should allay any doubts anyone might have that the god of abraham, isaac and jacob can still do miracles.

i want to begin by asking all of us to remember taylor force, a texan who hailed from lubbock, an eagle scout, a west point graduate, an army veteran. on march 8th, he was stabbed to death by a palestinian terrorist in israel. the terrorist didn't ask for his passport. influenced by the relentless campaign of incitement that has fostered genocidal hatred towards jews, all he cared about was injuring or killing as many civilians as possible, at least 10 people were wounded by the time the terrorist was neutralized. the brutal murder of taylor force is yet another reminder that america and israel are in the fight together against radical islamic terrorism.

we need a president who will be a champion for america and we need a president who will be a champion for israel. in my time in the senate, i have endeavored to do both. in the four years i've been serving in the senate, i've been privileged to travel three times to the state of israel.

i had the great privilege of seeing the ziv hospital in northern israel where they have treated over 1,000 refugees from syria wounded in that horrible syrian civil war, have done so free of charge showing the heart and character of the people of israel.

when the nation of iran named as their ambassador to the united nations hamid aboutalebi, a known terrorist who had participated in holding americans hostage in the late 1970s, people in washington said there was nothing we could do. well, i was proud to introduce legislation barring aboutalebi from coming to america. that legislation passed the senate 100 to nothing, it passed the house 435 to nothing and it was signed into law by president obama.

when israel was facing relentless rocket attacks from hamas and the prayers of all of us and people across the world were with israel, prime minister netanyahu powerfully observed, we are using missile defense to protect our civilians and they are using their civilians to protect their missiles.

i entirely agree with prime minister netanyahu as hamas would place rockets in elementary schools, they placed their headquarters in the basement of a hospital and i would note that hillary clinton, in 2014, explained this as follows, quote, "hamas puts its missiles, its rockets in civilian areas, part of it is because gaza is pretty small and it's densely populated."

well, madame secretary, with all respect, the reason the missiles are in schools is not because gaza is small, the reason the missiles are in schools is because hamas are terrorist monsters using children as human shields.

and in response to this atrocity, i was proud to join with new york democrat kirsten gillibrand in authoring a resolution condemning hamas's use of human shields as a war crime and that resolution passed both houses of congress unanimously.

in the midst of these rocket attacks, we saw the obama administration cancel civilian airline flights in the nation of israel. when that happened, i publicly asked the question, did this administration just launch an economic boycott on the nation of israel?

the administration does not ban flights into pakistan, does not ban flights into yemen, does not ban flights into afghanistan, indeed, did not ban flights into much of ukraine, and ukraine had just seen a passenger airliner shot down by a russian buk missile.

so why exactly was a disproportionate sanction put on israel because one rocket fell harmlessly a mile away from ben-gurion airport, one of the safest airports in the world?

and why was that time to coincide with john kerry arriving in the middle east with $47 million for gaza that would inevitably end up with hamas terrorists?

well, when i asked that question, within hours, the state department was being asked, is this an economic boycott of israel? the state department said, that question is ridiculous, we refuse to answer. so i responded, fine, i will place a hold on every nominee to the state department. shortly thereafter, former new york mayor michael bloomberg rode a civilian airliner from london to tel aviv demonstrating that it was safe to fly to israel.

and as a result of mayor bloomberg's efforts and my efforts and that of millions of others, the heat and light and attention became too much on this administration and within 36 hours, the administration lifted its ban on civilian air flights to israel. looking forward as president, i will lead very, very differently from the current administration.

imagine just a few years ago if i had come to an aipac conference and suggested that the prime minister of israel was going to come to america, address a joint session of congress and he would be boycotted by the president of the united states, the vice president of the united states and every member of the cabinet, that would've been dismissed as crazy, fanciful, that could never happen and sadly, that is exactly what did happen when prime minister netanyahu came to address congress.

in a similar vein, my leading republican opponent has promised that he, as president, would be neutral between israel and the palestinians. well, let me be very, very clear, as president, i will not be neutral. america will stand unapologetically with the nation of israel.

so what does that mean specifically? let's start with today's persian king, the nation of iran. both hillary clinton and donald trump have said they would maintain this iranian deal, although, donald has promised he's going to negotiate and get a better deal. well, my view is very different, on the first day in office, i will rip this catastrophic iranian nuclear deal to shreds.

this agreement gives over $100 billion to the ayatollah khomeini, the world's leading state sponsor of terrorism. that dwarfs the $3 billion in military aid we give each year to the nation of israel. that difference is not just unconscionable, it is fundamentally immoral and if i am president, on the first day, we will re-impose sanctions on iran.

in a mockery of this iranian nuclear deal, iran has continued with missile tests, including launching a missile with the words printed on it in both hebrew and farsi, israel should be wiped from the earth. hear my words, ayatollah khomeini, if i am president and iran launches a missile test, we will shoot that missile down.

and in january 2017, we will have a commander in chief who says, under no circumstances will iran be allowed to acquire nuclear weapons. either you will shut down your nuclear program or we will shut it down for you.

a year ago when prime minister netanyahu addressed congress, i was honored to join the great elie wiesel on a panel discussion in the senate about this disastrous iranian deal. not a single democrat was willing to join elie wiesel, to sit alongside someone who witnessed firsthand the horrors of the holocaust, who brings a moral weight and gravity second to none, was both powerful and humbling and i am convinced, after this election, the american people will stand and say together, never again means never again.

on my very first day in office, i will begin the process of moving the american embassy in israel to jerusalem, the once and eternal capital of israel. now, i recognize for years, a whole lot of presidential candidates, both republicans and democrats, have said that indeed, i recognize, some candidates have said that standing here today. here's the difference, i will do it.

and as president, i will do everything in my power to ensure that anyone who provides financial support to the bds movement, including schools and universities will lose any access to federal funding. and to the extent that they have engaged in illegal behavior, they will be prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law.

all of us here understand that israel is not the barrier to peace. it is the palestinian authority in a so-called unity government with hamas that celebrates the murder of women and children and incites and even compensates the terrorist attacks. if the palestinians try to push through a united nations resolution to unilaterally declare palestinian statehood, american will veto that resolution.

indeed, i tell you today, i will fly to new york to personally veto it myself.

now, some have asked, why on earth did a cuban-american texas become one of the leading defenders of israel in the united states congress? well, i would say there are several reasons. first of all, i understand that standing with israel benefits america.

israel is a liberal democracy that shares our values. israel is a steadfast and loyal ally and our military aid to israel is not charity, it is rather furthering the vital national security interests of the united states of america, whether it is missile defense from iron dome to david's sling or whether it is intelligence and military cooperation, israel provides an enormous benefit to keeping america safe and protecting us from radical islamic terrorists.

but on a very personal level, for me, much of my view of israel is framed by my family's story. my father was born and raised in cuba. as a kid, he fought in the cuban revolution. he was imprisoned, he was tortured. my father fled cuba in 1957. when he came to america, he had nothing. he had $100 sewn into his underwear and he washed dishes making 50 cents an hour.

he paid his way through school; he went on to start a small business. when i was a kid, my dad used to say to me over and over again, "when i faced oppression in cuba, i had a place to flee to. if we lose our freedom here, where do we go?" and i will tell you, it is an incredible blessing to be the child of an immigrant who fled oppression and came to america seeking freedom.

and there is one other nation on earth like the united states of america that was created as an oasis, as a beacon of hope to people who had faced oppression, had faced horrible murder and persecution, the nation of israel, like america is a beacon of light unto the world.

and all of us here understand, as ronald reagan did, that peace is achievable only through strength. this is what israel understands when you are surrounded by neighbors who would drive you into the sea. somehow you don't have time for political correctness.

weakness is provocative. appeasement increases the chance of military conflict. indeed, i believe this iranian nuclear deal is munich in 1938 and we risk, once again, catastrophic consequences to allowing a homicidal maniac to acquire the tools to murder millions.

the way to avoid conflict is to stand up to bullies and it is worth remembering that this same nation, iran, in 1981, released our hostages the day ronald reagan was sworn into office.

that is the difference a strong commander-in-chief can make and together, standing as one, we can and will do it again. thank you. god bless america and am yisrael chai.
wow! god bless redstate. jim, thank you for that incredible, that extraordinary, that unbelievably kind introduction. thank you for your leadership. let me tell you, jim is a fearless conservative fighter in the house of representatives. you know, in congress, you can pretty much measure how strong you're standing for conservative principles by just how much you need a food taster in the member's dining room. and i think jim employees 5 food tasters.

it is great to be back. you know, we had a nice, quiet evening in cleveland a couple of days ago. what an incredible array of candidates for president we have this year. i have to say, looking up and down that stage seeing the young, dynamic, optimistic, forward looking conservatives, it was powerful. then you have the democrats. you know, i'm pretty sure the democrats debate is consists of hilary and the chipotle clerk. that's not fair, that's not fair, bernie sanders has entered the race. now the democratic field consists of a wild-eyed socialist, with ideas that are endangering america's place in the world, and bernie sanders. what a statement about the two sides of this debate and the conservative movement – there is life, there's vibrancy, there are 10 candidates, there are 17 candidates, there are 156 candidates. on the other side, it's like that 70's show. they're not even having a debate. you're hearing their newest thing, maybe we'll move it to october, november, december, maybe 2017 we'll schedule the democratic primary debate. actually, they did plan to have a debate earlier, the problem was the invitation was emailed to hilary.

there is a reason the life, the vibrancy, the excitement, the energy, is with conservatives this year. our country's in crisis. we know it, all across this country. you know, yesterday i had a rally charleston, south carolina. had a woman come up to me at the rally, she said, in 2008, i voted for barack obama. she said, in 2012, i didn't vote for anyone, i was so upset, i just stayed home. and she said, in 2016, i'm with you. what i want to talk to y'all about today is this is our time.

i want to talk you as the leaders of the conservative movement. redstate is an incredible gathering. this is the 7th redstate, this is the 7th time i've been at redstate. i remember the first redstate at an atlanta hotel with a gathering that wasn't much bigger than this right here. the men and women who are here, y'all are leaders, you're bloggers, you're journalists, you're activists, you're informed though leaders. every person sitting here touches hundreds, touches thousands, touches tens of thousands. listen, i know it firsthand i wouldn't be in the united states senate if it were not for the men and women in this room, if it were not for the leaders at redstate. there's a reason that when i launched my campaign for senate, we did it on a conference call with bloggers, because we understand the power of serious, conservative thought leaders.

you know for a long time the conservative movement, we've been lamenting for decades, how come nobody will stand up? how come we elect one leader after another after another, they talk a good game and then when it comes to the fight, when the shooting starts, they end up cowering under their desks? this is something we've said over and over and over again. we've got to distinguish between campaign conservatives, who on the campaign trail suddenly discover they're the most conservative soul to have ever lived. it is amazing what happens on the campaign trail. have you ever noticed, okay, last night in cleveland, i'm pretty sure not a single person in the debate stood up and said, i'm an establishment moderate. i stand for nothing. have you noticed that they run as us. that's how they run. by the way, if they say you're actually us, you're unelectable. but yet, when they're running they understand that they're message doesn't sell. the men and women in this room can play a critical role leading the conservative movement in assessing the record of very candidate. i'm going to suggest a simple test, each of you, i would encourage, make a list of the 10 or 12 biggest issues, the biggest fights of the past several years, and you decide, based on what matter to you, whether it's fiscal conservative issues or social conservative issues, constitutional issues, or national security issues – you make the list and ask every candidate running if he or she has stood up and led on those issues in any meaningful way. this is a room of serious, educated political observers, activists, and leaders. ask any candidate, here's my list, when have you stood up to stop obamacare? not talked about it, but stood in the foxholes when incoming was coming at you. when have you stood and fought president obama's unconstitutional and illegal executive amnesty? when have you stood and fought against the debt that's bankrupting our kids and grandkids? when have you stood and fought to defend the first amendment – free speech, and especially, especially, especially religious liberty? and i got to tell you, indiana was a time for choosing. there were so many republican leaders who ran for the hills. on the second amendment, where were you when harry reid and barack obama were trying to come after our right to keep and bear arms? on the fourth amendment, what have you done to keep the federal government from seizing the cell phone communications and emails of law abiding citizens? on the tenth amendment, where are you on common core, and did you always oppose it, or di you just magically oppose it the day you announced for president? on marriage, are you willing to stand up and lead, or when the supreme court justice's violated their oaths and issued their lawless decision, did you come out with some statement about law of the land, etcetera, surrender, move on? on life, when have you stood and fought on life? on planned parenthood, how are you leading, and are you looking for a meaningless show vote, or are you actually looking for leadership to stop, what appears to be, an ongoing criminal organization of planned parenthood? on israel what have you done standing and leading the fight to stand with israel on isis and radical islamic terrorism and iran? when have you stood and fought to lead? that's the test – those are my dozen. but i encourage each of you, find your own dozen that you think are the biggest fights of the day, and ask of every candidate, what's their record? what have they actually done leading on those issues. that's what the men and women in this room can do more effectively than anyone else; dive down, below the talking points to the actual records.

now why does it matter so much? you know it matters, because over and over again, we keep winning, and we lose. we win elections, but the people we elect don't do what they said they would. we were told, if only you can get the house of representatives, then things will be different. so i 2010, millions of americans, led by the men and women in this room, we rose up and won the house, and virtually nothing changed. then we were told, okay, the problem's the senate. you guys don't understand, it's just a half of the third of the government, you can't do it with just the house. so we said, fine, harry reid's the problem. so, in 2014, millions of americans rose up in a historic election. we won the senate, we retired harry reid as majority leader. and what exactly has this new republican majority accomplished? it's actually even worse than that. i've got to say, in hearing nothing, i'm reminded of one of those great scenes from the untouchables, where robert de niro as capone says, "man stands at the plate with a bat in his hands, alone, but without his team what is he? nothing" it's worse than that, in this case, our team's playing for the other side. november 2014, we won historic majorities in both houses. what happened since then? what happened is the republican leadership joined with harry reid and passed a trillion dollar cromnibus plan filled with corporate welfare and pork. then the republican majority voted to fund obamacare, to fund obama's executive amnesty, to fund planned parenthood, then republican leadership led the fight to confirm loretta lynch as attorney general of the united states. here's one simple question, which of those decisions is one iota different that it would have been with harry reid and the democrats.

this is why we're frustrated. and this is why the men and women in this room have such an important role to ask of every candidate running, don't just tell me how you've stood up to democrats, particularly in a context that didn't matter much, show me when you stood up to your own party; show me where you've stood up to republican leadership and the washington cartel and stood with the people. now, a lot of folks in the media want to convince us nothing can be done; it's too complicated, it's to big, you can't change the country. they want to tell us everyone here give up, go home, abandon hope all ye who enter here.

let me take a minute to expand on my closing statement in cleveland. let me tell you what i intend to do on my first day in office if i'm elected president. on january 20th, 2017, the first thing i intend to do is rescind every illegal and unconstitutional executive action taken by barack obama. and that's why we're going to win. you know, the president is fond of saying he has a phone and he has a pen. well, you live by the pen, you die by the pen. but it's not just been the white house and executive orders that have been lawless. the entire executive administration has been corrupted by the partisan lawlessness of this administration. if i'm elected president, the second thing i will do on january 20th, 2017 is instruct the department of justice to open investigation into planned parenthood and to prosecute any violations that are uncovered. the rule of law matters, the department of justice is a fair and impartial enforcer of the laws, regardless of which party is in power. that's how our constitution is designed to work. the third thing i intend to do on january 2oth, 2017, is instruct the department of justice and the irs and every agency of the federal government, that you will cease today persecuting religious liberty in this country. the little sisters of the poor, the catholic charity persecuted for standing for their religious faith instead of receiving a legal summons from the obama justice department, will receive a notice in the mail that the case against them has been dismissed. and accompanying that will be an invitation for the little sisters to come to the white house and tell their courageous story to the world. the fourth thing i intend to do on january 20th, is rip up and rescind this catastrophic iran nuclear deal.

a couple of weeks ago, i observed that if this deal goes into effect, the obama administration will become the world's leading global financier of radical islamic terrorism. in response, a little over a week ago, president obama, from africa, took time out of his busy schedule to attack me directly for daring to say such a thing. he seemed very dismayed – and i do so hate dismaying the man – very dismayed, he said that language is too much, you can't say that. sadly, a number of republicans have echoed the rhetoric. have said the rhetoric is too much, don't use language like that. that's what mitt romney tweeted, that's what jeb bush has said. no, no, no, don't say such things. let me say something right now: truth is not rhetoric. nowhere in his attack on me from africa did president obama actually dispute the facts of what said. here are the facts: iran is today, and will remain, the world's leading state sponsor of terrorism. number two, if this deal goes through, over 100 billion dollars will flow directly to iran. number three, of that money, billions will be given to hamas, to hezbollah, to the houthis, to radical islamic terrorists around the world. now, if there are hundreds of billions of dollars in the control of the american government that go directly to jihadist that use that money to murder americans and israelis and europeans. and the facts are incontrovertible. if president obama doesn't like the rhetoric, then he should stop being the world's leading global financier of radical islamic terrorism. that he should stop financing radical islamic terrorism! and we will not win if we're afraid to speak the truth. to speak the truth with a smile, to speak the truth from love, but to speak the truth, with absolute courage that the truth will set us free.

the fifth thing i intend to do on january 20th, 2017, is begin the process of moving the united states embassy in israel to jerusalem, the once and eternal capital of israel. you know, candidates for president, republican and democrats, have promised to do that over and over and over again, and when they get to the white house, one after the other after the other doesn't follow through. let me give you a very simple difference, i believe, between me, and the other folks standing on that debate stage in cleveland. with me, you know what you're going to get, and i'm going to do exactly what i told you i would do.

let me make a final point about how we win. you know, the media,, the democrats – although i repeat myself – they love to tell us a conservative can't win they say it over and over and over again. here's their basic rule: anytime you stand up for conservative principles, you'll get the living daylights beaten out of you. democrats will attack you, the media will attack you, republicans will attack you, and then they immediately say, well if you've had the living daylights beaten out of you, then you can't be elected. that reduces to, we can only nominate someone if they've never stood for conservative principles. and every time we do that, we lose. you know, heidi and i spent many months thinking about and praying about whether to launch this campaign. our daughters, catherine ad caroline, they're 4 and 7. you don't lightly throw a young family into the maelstrom that is a political presidential campaign. the single biggest factor that led us to go forward is that we have to win this race, and as i look at the rest of the field – there's a lot of young, talented candidates who i like, who i respect, who are friends of mine – but i don't see a lot of candidates who i think can mobilize and energize and inspire and bring back millions of conservatives – the evangelical christians, the reagan democrats, the young people that we've got to bring back to win. and the reason we decided to run is, i believe, i'm in the best position to energize and mobilize and bring back to the polls those millions of conservatives and to rebuild that reagan coalition, to bring together conservatives and evangelicals and libertarians and young people and hispanics and women and reagan democrats. that's how we win. we win by standing with hardworking men and women, a populist campaign against the bipartisan corruption of washington.

when we launched the campaign, the new york times said, cruz cannot win because the washington elites despise him. i kind of thought that was the whole point of the campaign. but here's the thing that's powerful, that's transformation. you know, the times went on to say, okay, fine, the grassroots will be with cruz, but he ain't going to have any money, because the lobbyist and washington cartel they control all the money, and all the lobbyists are with other candidates running, because they're not going to rock the boat or need the gravy train. all of us filed our first fundraising reports a couple of weeks ago. out of 17 republican candidates running, you know which candidate raised the most hard money for the campaign? i'll give you one tweak to that, i didn't do that. you did. we raised just over 14.3 million dollars over three months. second place was jeb bush at 11.4 million. now, if anyone would have said that cruz was going to outraise every republican candidate, including outraise jeb bush by three million dollars, you'd have said i was stark raving, bark at the moon nuts. but here's how we did it. we had over a 175,000 contributions from all 50 states and all 5 territories. the average contribution was $68. we have people from all over the country go to tedcruz.org – tedcruz.org, tedcruz.org. here's an amazing statistic – we have donations from roughly half the zip codes in america; 48.1%. that is the power of the men and women in this room that is the power of the grassroots. if we're going to beat the washington cartel, the only way it's ever been done was in 1980, the reagan revolution, it came from the people. if we do it together, if we stand up together – the only force strong enough to turn this country around is "we the people", and that's exactly what we're going to do, because this is our time to take america back.
let me tell you about the america that i love. our nation is an exceptional nation. we were founded by risk takers and pioneers, brave men and women who put everything on the line for freedom. we began with a revolutionary idea that our rights don’t come from kings or queens or even presidents but from god almighty.
that every one of us has an unalienable right to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
and that to protect those rights the constitution serves as change to bind the mischief of government.
for more than two centuries, we have protected those rights. we believe in equal rights for everybody — that everybody deserves dignity and respect whether they agree with you or not. that there will always be evil in the world and injustice in the world but america stands up to it and confronts it.
even from a montgomery jail our voice for justice and equality rings out for the ages. america is hopeful, optimistic. america is kind. we are not boastful or mean spirited. america is brave. we keep our word and we believe in peace through strength.
we have spilled more blood, spent more treasure in defence of liberty than any country in history yet we do not engage in wars of conquest. we do not seek to enrich ourselves at our neighbors’ expense. america is the land that gave my mom, an irish italian girl growing up in a working class family the chance to be the first in her family ever to go to college, to become a pioneering computer programmer in the 1950s.
i love you, mom. america is the land that welcomed my father as a penny immigrant. he’d seen oppression, prison and torture in cuba and for him america was hope. it was opportunity. in 1957, if someone had told that teenager washing dishes for $0.50 an hour that one day his son would be elected to the senate and he would get a chance to cast his ballot for his son to be president of the united states …
that teenage immigrant washing dishes could never have believed it and yet that’s exactly what happened. only in america.
in recent months, a lot of people have been talking about what happened 40 years ago at the republican convention in kansas city — our party’s last contested convention. when i look back at that convention in missouri, i think of the speech that ronald reagan gave to our party. he spoke not of the next four years. he saw not the close horizons that of interest to those who seek to build their own fortunes in the short term but instead he looked to the distance times and — that concerned the men and women who’s purpose it is to secure the blessings of liberty to their posteriority.
ronald reagan spoke of the next 100 years and of the generations of americans who would come to know whether our nation had escaped the existential threat of nuclear war, who would know whether our party had succeeded in its fight against the erosion of constitutional freedoms that only grow and multiple under rule of the democratic party. ronald reagan spoke of the purpose that defined our party then and that must unite and drive our party now.
the republican party of ronald reagan and of george herbert walker bush ensured that thousands of nuclear missiles that the soviet union and the united states had targeted each other were never fired and that soviet communism was consigned to the ash heap of history.
they fought hard so that our american freedoms were not lost to any foreign foe nor sacrificed in pursuit of any domestic agenda of the democratic party.
yet the challenges we face today remain as great as ever. americans are deeply frustrated and desperately want to change the path that we’re on. we have economic stagnation at home and our constitutional rights are under assault. under the obama-clinton foreign policy, russia has emerged as a resurgent threat.
china looks with a covetous eye on the lands of our allies in the region. a nuclear north korea and a near nuclear iran yearn to devastate our homeland and radical islamic terrorism unleashes an evil that threatens the world. this year, two weeks before our party gathers in cleveland all americans will celebrate the 240th birthday of the united states of america.
american parents and grandparents will watch the fireworks with their kids and will dream of the grandchildren and great-grandchildren to come and wonder how those future generations of americans will remember what we do not only this summer but in the coming decades. will we rise to meet the challenges that face our nation on the international stage or will we withdraw and cower timidly from the world?
will we secure freedom of thought, expression and religion for future generations?
or will we succumb to the tyranny of a political correctness and the temptation of radical politics and balkanization here at home?
will we hold fast to our founding values of rewarding talent, hard work and industry or will we continue on that path of creeping socialism that incentivizes apathy and dependency?
will we deliver control of health care to citizens and their doctors or will we continue down the obamacare road to second rate socialized medicine?
will we keep america safe from the threats of nuclear war and atomic terrorism?
or will we pass onto future generations a land devastated and destroyed by the enemies of civilization?
this is the responsibility with which we have been charged by history. this is our challenge. this is the fight that falls to our generation. when we launched this campaign 13 months ago we saw a movement grow. the pundits all said it was hopeless but we saw over 300,000 volunteers all across this nation.
over 1.5 million contributions averaging about $60 each.
many of those volunteers, many of those contributions you never forget. just a few days ago two young kids ages four and six handed me two envelopes full of change. all of their earnings from their lemonade stand. they wanted the campaign to have it. that’s what built this campaign. that’s what fuels this movement.
thank you to each of you. incredible patriots who have fought so hard to save our nation.
and i’m with you. i am so grateful to you, to my amazing wife, heidi.
to our precious girls, caroline and kathryn.
to my mom, the prayer warrior.

to my dad who has traveled this nation preaching the gospel.
to carly fiorina who has been an incredible, phenomenal running mate.
what you have done — the movement that you have started is extraordinary. i love each and every one of you.
from the beginning i’ve said that i would continue on as long as there was a viable path to victory. tonight, i’m sorry to say it appears that path has been foreclosed. together, we left it all on the field in indiana. we gave it everything we’ve got but the voters chose another path. and so with a heavy heart but with boundless optimism for the long term future of our nation, we are suspending our campaign. but hear me now i am not suspending our fight for liberty.
i am not suspending our fight to defend the constitution, to defend the judeo-christian values that built america.
our movement will continue and i give you my word that i will continue this fight with all of my strength and all of my ability.
you are extraordinary and we will continue to fight next week and next month and next year and together we will continue as long as god grants us the strength to fight on.
for one thing remains as true today as it was 40 years ago in kansas city. in this fight for the long term future of america there is no substitute for victory. there is no substitute for the america that each and every one of us loves with all of our heart, that we believe in with all of our heart and that together we will restore as a shining city on the hill for every generation to come. thank you to each of you and god bless you.
thank you. thank you, and god bless each and every one of you. heidi and i are so honored to join you here in cleveland where lebron james just led an incredible comeback victory. and i am convinced, america is going to come back, too.

i want to congratulate donald trump on winning the nomination last night. and like each of you, i want to see the principles of that our party believes prevail in november. conventions are times of excitement, but given the events of the last few weeks, i hope you will allow me a moment to talk to you about what is really at stake.

just two weeks ago, a nine-year-old girl named caroline was having a carefree texas summer, swimming in the pool, playing with friends, doing all of the things a happy child might do. like most children, she relied upon the love that she received from her mom, heidi, and her dad, a police sergeant named michael smith. that is, until he became one of the five police officers gunned down in dallas.

the day her father was murdered, caroline gave him a hug and a kiss as he left for work. but as they parted, her dad asked her something he hadn’t asked before. what if this is the last time you ever kiss or hug me? later, as she thought of her fallen father, and that last heartbreaking hug, caroline broke down in tears. how could anything ever be ok again?

michael smith was a former army ranger who spent three decades with the dallas police department. i have no idea who he voted for in the last election or what he thought about this one. but his life was a testament to devotion. he protected the very protesters who mocked him because he loved his country and his fellow man. his work gave new meaning to that line from literature, to die of love is to live by it.

as i thought about what i wanted to say tonight, michael smith's story weighed on my heart maybe that is because his daughter caroline is about the same age as my eldest daughter, and happens to share the same name. maybe it is because i saw a video of that dear, sweet child choking back sobs as she remembered her daddy's last question to her.

maybe it’s because we live in a world where so many others had their lives destroyed by evil in places like orlando and paris and nice and baton rouge. maybe it’s because of the simple question itself, what if this, right now, is our last time? our last moment to do something for our families and our country? did we live up to the values we say we believe? did we do all we really could? that is really what this election should be about. that’s why you and millions like you devoted so much time and sacrifice to this campaign.

we’re fighting not for one particular candidate or one campaign, but because each of us wants to be able to tell our kids and grandkids, our own carolines, that we did our best for their future and our country.

america is more than just a land mass between two oceans. america is an ideal, a simple but powerful idea. freedom matters. for much of human history, government power has been the unavoidable constant in life. government decrees and the people obey. but not here.

we have no king or queen, we have no dictator, we the people constrain government. our nation is exceptional because it was built on the five most beautiful and powerful words in the english language, i want to be free.

never has that message been more needed than today. we stand here tonight a nation divided. partisan rancor, even hatred are tearing america apart and citizens are furious, rightly furious, at a political establishment that cynically breaks its promises and that ignores the will of the people.

we have to do better. we owe our fallen heroes more than that. now, of course, obama and clinton will also tell you that they care about our children's future. and i want to believe them. but there is a profound difference in our two parties' vision for the future. theirs is the party that thinks isis is a jv team. that responds to the death of americans at benghazi by asking, what difference does it make?

and that thinks it is possible to make a deal with iran which celebrates its holidays, death to america day and death to israel day. my friends, this is madness. president obama is a man who does everything backwards. he wants to close guantanamo bay and open up our borders. he exports jobs and imports terrorists. enough is enough.

and i am here to tell you there is a better vision for our future, a return to freedom. on education, your freedom to choose your child's education, even if you aren’t as rich as hillary clinton or barack obama. on health care, your freedom to choose your own doctor without obamacare. on taxes, your freedom to provide for your family without the irs beating down your door. the internet, keep it free from taxes, free from regulation, and do not give it away to russia and china.

freedom means free speech, not politically correct safe spaces. freedom means religious freedom, whether you're christian or jew, muslim or atheist. whether you're gay or straight, the bill of rights protects the rights of all of us to live according to our conscience. freedom means the right to keep and bear arms and protect your family. freedom means that every human life is precious and must be protected.

freedom means supreme court justices who do not dictate policy but instead, follow the constitution. and freedom means recognizing that our constitution allows states to choose policies that reflect local values. colorado might decide something different than texas. new york, different than iowa. that is the way it is supposed to be, diversity. if not, what is the point of having states to begin with?

hillary clinton believes government should make virtually every choice in your life. education, health care, marriage, speech, all dictated out of washington. but something powerful is happening. we have seen it in both parties. we have seen it in the united kingdom’s unprecedented brexit vote to leave the european union.

voters are overwhelmingly rejecting the political establishment and overwhelmingly rejecting big government. that is a profound victory, and it is one earned by each and every one of you. people are fed up with politicians who don’t listen to them. fed up with a corrupt system that benefits the elites instead of working men and women. we deserve an immigration system that puts america first, and yes, builds a wall to keep america safe.

a government, a government that stops admitting isis terrorists as refugees. we deserve trade policies that put the interests of american farmers and manufacturing jobs over the global interests that are funding the lobbyists. and if we stand together and choose freedom, our future will be brighter. freedom will bring back jobs and raise wages. freedom will lift people out of dependency to the dignity of work.

we can do this. 47 years ago, to this day, america put the very first man on the moon. that was the power of freedom. our party, the republican party, was founded to defeat slavery. abraham lincoln, the first republican president, signed the emancipation proclamation. together, we passed the civil rights act, and together, we thought to eliminate jim crow laws.

that is our collective legacy, although the media will never share it with you. those were fights for freedom, and so is this. sergeant michael smith stood up to protect our freedom, so do the soldiers and sailors and airmen and marines every day, fighting radical islamic terrorism. and so did the family of alton sterling, who bravely called to end the violence.

so did the families of those murdered at the charleston emmanuel ame church over who forgave that hateful, bigoted murderer. and so can we. we deserve leaders who stand for principle, who unite us all behind shared values, who cast aside anger for love. that is the standard we should expect from everybody. and to those listening, please, don’t stay home in november.

if you love our country, and love your children as much as i know that you do, stand and speak and vote your conscience, vote for candidates up and down the ticket who you trust to defend our freedom and to be faithful to the constitution.

i appreciate the enthusiasm of the new york delegation. and i will tell you, it is love of freedom that has allowed millions to achieve their dreams. like my mom, the first and her family to go to college, and my my dad, who is here tonight, who fled prison and torture in cuba, coming to texas with just $100 sewn into his underwear. and it is love that i hope will bring comfort to a grieving nine-year-old girl in dallas.

and god willing, propel her to move forward and dream, and soar and make her daddy proud. we must make the most of our moments to fight for freedom, to protect our god-given rights, even if -- even with those with whom we do not agree. so that when we are old and gray, and when our work is done and we give those we love one final kiss goodbye, we will be able to say, freedom matters and i was part of something beautiful.

the case we have to make to the american people, the case each person in this room has to make to the american people, is to commit to each of them that we will defend freedom and be faithful to the constitution.

we will unite the party, we will unite the country, by standing together for shared values by standing for liberty. god bless each and every one of you, and god bless the united states of america.
“thank you, everyone, for coming out this morning. good morning. it is great to be with so many good friends at heritage. heritage is such a jewel in this country, such a font of ideas, and creative thinking, and energy – energy that i believe is needed to change the direction of this country.
“it’s also particularly fitting that we’re here today, and in just a few months we will be celebrating the 30th anniversary of one of ronald reagan’s most important speeches – a speech that he gave right here at this institution, initiating an endowment drive that led to so much good, in reagan’s times and our own.
“at that speech, reagan discussed the present challenges, including the threat of terrorism. and in particular, he talked about the corrective that the us air force had just sent to colonel gaddafi in libya, encouraging him to give up terrorism. the corrective came in the form of a military jet and a bomb down his front porch.
“but i especially liked president reagan’s description of how one of his most famous appointees, un ambassador jeanne kirkpatrick, once explained to the rest of the world what it meant to have conservatives in charge of foreign policy.
“first, he talked about the u.s. government’s approach toward terrorism: ‘... no nation—friend or foe, ally or adversary—should be surprised by the events of last week,’ he said of the recent and deliberate bombing. his actions made clear his ‘determination to protect american lives and the world from terrorism.’
“and then he singled out ambassador kirkpatrick:
“‘and yet, even at the start of the administration, people like jeane kirkpatrick were offering some pretty broad hints that things will be different. ‘how will the reagan administration change american foreign policy?’ she was asked early in 1981 at the united nations. she answered correctly. she said, ‘well, we’ve taken down our ‘kick me’ sign.’ and someone said, ‘well, does this mean that if the united states is kicked, it will kick back?’.... ‘not necessarily,’ she said. ‘but it does mean we won’t apologize.’ well, we haven’t been apologizing. things are different. and perhaps you’ve noticed. i know colonel gaddafi has.’ that was reagan here at heritage 30 years ago.
“the challenges that ronald reagan and jean kirkpatrick faced in their times were daunting: first and foremost, the threat of soviet communism—a threat that many in america thought could not be beaten, we were told that on an almost daily basis by elected officials, by academics, by those in the media. but with a focus, a determination, and an unshakable belief in the greatness of our exceptional nation, president reagan won the cold war.
“today, we’re once again facing challenging times, both at home and abroad. again, we face an aggressive enemy whose goal is nothing less than the eradication of our very way of life. and there are many in this country who fear once again that we cannot defeat this enemy, that to even speak its name labels us bigots.
“it reminds me of that line from the movie ‘the usual suspects’: ‘the greatest trick the devil ever played was to convince the world he didn’t exist.’
“it seems when it comes to president obama and hillary clinton, radical islamic terrorism is something that just doesn’t exist. but the rest of us living on terra firma, living in the real world are aware that it is real, it is growing, and it is profoundly dangerous.
“what america needs today is a moment of clarity. our enemy is radical islamic terrorism, and this is an enemy that can and will be defeated.
“as we enter the final year of the obama administration, proof for all that there is indeed a god, there is little hope that this president will rise to the challenge and a much greater likelihood that his successor will be dealing with an even more dangerous world than what we face today.
“two key issues will demand the attention of our next president: keeping america safe at home and strong abroad. ensuring both should be the basic responsibility—and first priority—of any commander in chief.
“the recent terrorist attacks on paris and san bernadino have brought front and center the issue of radical islamic terrorism, but the fact of the matter is that the problem has been festering unattended for the entire obama administration.
“for president obama, however, such issues are peripheral at best to his core progressive agenda -- an agenda that appeases our enemies, before actually defending the national security interests of our great country.
“while the president and his secretaries of state have chosen to ignore the problem and to recede from global leadership, terrorist groups like isis have mobilized and carried out a string of deadly attacks around the globe.
“it is worth noting that the attack on san bernardino has been called ‘the deadliest terror attack on u.s. soil since 9/11.’ fourteen innocent lives murdered. that depiction is actually incorrect. we’ve had one other terror attack on u.s. soil that took 14 lives, and it occurred in my home state of texas at fort hood on november 9, 2009. that likewise claimed 14 lives. the littlest victim, the unborn baby of private franceska valdez, was brutally murdered along with her mother, as nadal hassan shouted ‘allahu akbar.’
“the obama administration responded to this unspeakable terrorist attack by labeling it ‘workplace violence.’ one of the things i am most proud of my tenure in the senate is introducing legislation in the senate armed services committee to mandate that the victims of the fort hood shooting receive the purple heart, and against the active opposition of the obama pentagon, i was very pleased to earn the support of both democrats and republicans on the armed services committee. we passed that legislation into law in december, and in april of this year, finally, the purple heart was awarded to those victims of terrorism.
“whether it’s fort hood, san bernardino, or a number of others tragically in between—from little rock to boston to garland to chattanooga – president obama’s approach has been to treat each one in isolation. the administration has called the perpetrators ‘lone wolves’ – not to be associated with formal groups like al qaida or isis because they didn’t receive direct orders from them. they investigate any suspects. but they ignore the reality that our nation is under attack.

“what america needs today – just as we needed in the late 1970s, is first, a firm resolve to always protect americans’ freedom here at home – freedom that has made this the greatest nation on the face of the planet. but second, we need moral clarity. that starts with defining the enemy. and third, we restore america’s leadership in the world through a position of strength.
“how do we do that?
“first, we protect americans’ freedoms here at home.
“americans no longer feel safe in their schools, their workplaces, their cities. this should not be the new standard. this is not the new normal.
“heidi and i have two precious girls – caroline and catherine. they are 7 and 5. every time i pick them up, every time i hold them in my arms, i want them to be confident that they are protected and far from any harm. and a safe america starts with a secure america.
“it is beyond time now to secure our border. when terrorists can simply swim across the rio grande, we are daring them to make this journey. when 40 percent of illegal immigration in our country comes from visa overstays, we are inviting evil actors to game our system – as was the case with one of the 9/11 hijackers. and when we are opening up our country to thousands of refugees from regions filled with terrorists, terrorists with the expressed intent to kill us, our immigration policy ceases to be merely an economic or social question. border security is national security.
“we need a president with the political will to secure the border once and for all, and i have outlined a detailed immigration plan to do just that. it includes finally completing all 700 miles of the wall, mandated by federal law that the obama administration refuses to build, tripling the border patrol, increasing four-fold the fixed-wing and rotary-wing aircraft to monitor the border and direct boots on the ground where attempted incursions are occurring, finishing the biometric exit-entry system for our visas, again mandated by federal law, again ignored by the obama administration, and putting in place a strong e-verify system. it includes deporting criminal illegal aliens. it includes ending welfare benefits for those here illegally. and it includes ending the indefensible practice of catch-and-release.
“i have also introduced legislation in the senate to halt our refugee program for those coming from terror- ridden countries. in syria in particular, there is no question that the humanitarian disaster is horrific. millions of people have been displaced by the savage violence. millions are now living in camps that place severe strain on the resources of our allies. and it’s natural that out of our generosity, we want to help stop that misery. and while the united states has been the largest donor to the refugee cause by a factor of ten, giving 1.2 billion dollars of taxpayer funds, 10 times what any other nation has contributed, we cannot make the mistake of extending our generosity to the extent of imperiling the safety and security of american citizens. the first obligation of the commander-in-chief is to protect the safety and security of the united states of america.
“two recent episodes make clear the need for more vigilance.
“the first is the paris attacks, which took 120 lives. we now know that one of the bombers had arrived in france under the guise of being a refugee. it only takes one in a sea of millions to destroy our safety and to take unknown numbers of innocent lives.
“the second instance is fresh in the minds and hearts of people across the country. just over a week ago, a muslim couple who had pledged their support to isis murdered 14 americans in san bernardino. the

woman, tashfeen malik, came to this country on a fiancé visa. her application should have sent up any number of red flags, including a fake address in pakistan that should have been fairly simple to track down, but they went unnoticed. yesterday, fbi director james comey testified to congress that the two terrorists had been in contact online before she came to the country and had discussed martyrdom and jihad.
“this appears not to be a love story between two young, pious muslims, but rather the deliberate infiltration by an enemy of america who came here to plot and carry out a terrorist attack on our citizens. this must stop.
“now, i will also note, there are some on both the right and the left who want to exploit the current crisis by calling on americans to surrender our constitutional liberties as the only way to ensure our safety. the bill of rights is altogether compatible with protecting the safety and security of american citizens.
“on the right, there are some who have called for resurrecting the government’s bulk data collection that existed under the patriot act. more data from millions of law-abiding americans is not always better data. hoarding tens of billions of records of ordinary citizens – it didn’t stop fort hood, it didn’t stop boston, it didn’t stop chattanooga, it didn’t stop garland, and it failed to detect the san bernardino plot. when the focus of law enforcement and national security is on law-abiding citizens, rather than targeting the bad guys–we miss the bad guys, while violating the constitutional rights of american citizens.
“instead, the bulk data program was emblematic of the bureaucratic tendency to gather more, not better, information, which gives the government tremendous opportunity for abuse, as has been displayed powerfully by lois lerner’s irs. like the fable of the scorpion and the frog, the government will do what is in its nature: amass power at the expense of the people.
“this week, we commemorated the 74th anniversary of pearl harbor – let it be a reminder that it is often not a lack of intelligence, but a lack of perception.
 “i cosponsored the usa freedom act to enable the intelligence community to find, prosecute, and kill the bad guys, while protecting ordinary citizens’ privacy rights. indeed, under the usa freedom act, intelligence capabilities are ‘enhanced,’ those are not my words. those are the words of james clapper, the director of national intelligence, as he told congress this last may.
“under the usa freedom act, investigators have more tools to target suspected terrorists, to access their phone records, to track down those with whom they’ve communicated. under the old bulk data program, all of us were presumed guilty at the outset, and yet the universe of phone records that could be searched was materially smaller than the universe that can now be searched under the usa freedom act that has expanded the number of phones that can be targeted, but requires first some evidence that the person’s phone you’re going after is actually connected with terrorism. we should not shy away from smarter policies that enhance our ability to target the bad guys, while protecting the rights of law-abiding citizens.
“in addition to those voices on the right who are suggesting sweeping aside citizens’ fourth amendment rights, there are voices on the left who are taking the same approach and want us to voluntarily surrender our second amendment rights. both of these approaches are misguided, and chief among them going after the second amendment rights of law-abiding citizens is our president.
“with all due respect, the president has it exactly backwards – we don’t stop the bad guys by giving away our guns. we stop the bad buys by using our guns.

“let’s be very clear: the second amendment is not the enemy; isis is; radical islamic terrorism is; those who want to murder us are. as justice joseph story so rightly noted, the second amendment is the palladium of our liberties. these rights enable an armed citizenry to defend themselves against evil actors – whether they be criminals, or, as we are now seeing the threat increase, homegrown or migrant terrorists in our own cities.
“rather than stripping ordinary citizens of their constitutional liberties, we should have instead a clear strategy to utterly defeat isis.
“and that brings me to my second point – in addition to protecting americans here at home, the strategy to defeat the enemy begins by calling it by its name – radical islamic terrorism.
“on sunday, in the president’s address to the nation, he made an interesting point. he said,
“we need to take off the blinders of political correctness that prevent us from seeing what is right in front of us: that enemy is radical islamic terrorism and it is trying to destroy our country and our way of life. in a wall street journal column last week, peggy noonan wrote about the need for us to robustly defend our first amendment right to free speech against the forces that are trying to shame us into silence. it’s a topic for another speech, but in this context it raises the specter that americans will be labeled as bigots if they dare utter the word ‘islam’ in connection with a terrorist attack.
“our president refuses to do so. in fact, he spent a significant portion of his sunday address as an apologist for radical islamic terrorism.
“and as his attorney general, loretta lynch, told a gathering the day after the san bernardino attack that her department would move to prosecute anyone whose ‘anti-muslim rhetoric edged towards violence.’ the day after a terror attack –14 lives were snuffed away. we want a president and an attorney general who is standing up to defend this nation, not an attorney general who decrees herself the speech police for any who dare speak out against this threat. as has been the case all too often in the obama administration, we may be facing once again the weaponization of one of our own government agencies, deployed not to protect americans but to force them to submit to the obama administration’s code of what is and is not acceptable speech.
“attorney general lynch said that’s what she was most afraid of – that we might exercise our first amendment rights and speak out against this threat. how about having an attorney general who is focused on keeping our children safe, rather than muzzling the free speech rights of americans?
“and in fact, we are already seeing the consequences of fear stifling speech. the neighbors of syed farook and tashfeen malik reportedly found their behavior odd, but until now they didn’t say anything to law enforcement because they were scared they would be accused of racial profiling. imagine how different san bernardino would have played out, if the fear and political correctness had not silenced the neighbors, if a phone call had been made, if law enforcement had investigated, if they had discovered the abundant evidence of radicalization and intent to wage jihad, and if these two had been apprehended before they went on a murderous spree. loretta lynch’s ban on what she calls anti-muslim rhetoric is
 i’ve confronted this evolving threat each morning in my intelligence briefing.’ and yet, though he says he
‘for 7 years,
  understands this ‘evolving threat’ every day, he’s chosen not to deal with the reality. he’s chosen not to
 confront the actual enemy. he’s chosen not to call the attacks in fort hood, or little rock, or boston, or
 chattanooga concerted acts of radical islamic terrorism on our own citizens – our own mothers, and
 fathers, and sons, and daughters, and service members.

already producing its chilling effect, and it’s preventing americans from taking basic steps to protect ourselves.
“so let’s take off the blinders. it’s time to say that these attacks are not isolated incidents. these wolves are not ‘lone’—they are instead operating as an ideological pack. and the thing that unites them is their fanatical adherence to islamic supremacism: the conviction that the world must submit to their form of islam or die. this evil force is present in our country. as the fbi director reported, it is active in each one of our fifty states.
“and once we have identified the enemy, we must do everything in our power to defeat them.
“america and the world have grown more dangerous as president obama has receded from the world stage. every day that goes by the united states seems weaker and a more marginal actor, increasingly dismissed as irrelevant. increasingly viewed by the world’s leaders, our president is a laughing stock. and so, our third goal must be to restore america’s leadership in the world. as reagan knew well, the best way to project america’s leadership is by protecting and promoting america’s strength – and this principle should always guide our actions.
“the next president will have to contend with the ever-worsening state of american interests around the globe given the opportunities squandered and the enemies emboldened under president obama’s watch. our most immediate challenge comes from the middle east, which is what i want to talk about today, but make no mistake about it, this is a global problem and a significant potential for conflict from the baltics to the south china sea are made ever more difficult by president obama’s shameful and destructive defunding of our military.
“given president obama’s detached and dismissive address to the nation on sunday night, it is now a virtual certainty that the next president will have to deal with the scourge known as the islamic state, and that it will not be a local threat. we now know for a fact that if we withdraw from the middle east, the radical jihadists will not be content to stay there—they are going to attack our allies in the region and beyond. and they are on the lookout for every opportunity to attack us here at home. the next president will need to bring together the best civilian and military leadership to develop an actual and real plan to utterly defeat and destroy isis, a plan that is not shackled by concerns over environmental impact or the most restrictive rules of engagement that our armed forces have ever known.
“during the fifteen months of president obama’s failed military action against isis, i have strongly advocated for a concrete military plan, and proposed that options that we may employ would include maximizing our overwhelming air advantage with a sustained, coherent, directed bombing campaign. instead of what we have now which is a photo op foreign policy of a bomb here and a missile there, not actually achieve the goal of defeating isis. we should also be arming the kurds, the peshmerga, who have had considerable success against isis, despite the fact that isis is fighting with american military equipment they seized in iraq and the peshmerga are using outdated weapons because the obama administration for political reasons refuses to arm them because it would displease baghdad. our focus should not be on currying favor with baghdad, our focus should be on utterly defeating isis, and the kurdish peshmerga are critical boots on the ground for accomplishing that effort.
“beyond that, we should also include the jordanian and egyptian militaries, in which the united states has made significant investments in past decades. and then, above and beyond that, we should do whatever is necessary and required to defeat isis.

“some in the course of a political campaign have focused on the question of boots on the ground, american boots on the ground as a talismanic demonstration of strength. that is getting the deployment of military force precisely backwards. this is not a game of risk, where politicians move armies around to demonstrate their machismo. instead, you need a commander-in-chief who sets an objective of destroying isis, and then we need to rely on the expert military judgment as to the tools necessary to carry out that objective, including overwhelming military power, including arming the kurds, and including using whatever ground troops are necessary to kill the terrorists and then come home.
“the issue of isis is, however, only one piece of the complex geopolitical landscape of the middle east, and i’d like to turn now to how we might productively approach this troubled region in a way that will improve the broader strategic posture of the united states.
“thirty-six years ago last month, the remarkable intellect and diplomat whom i mentioned earlier, jeane kirkpatrick, published an essay in commentary entitled ‘dictatorships and double standards.’ it is an essay to which i commend everyone here today. she wrote to disprove the notion that the prime directive of american foreign policy should be ‘to democratize governments, anytime, anywhere, under any circumstances.’
“the particular target of ambassador kirkpatrick’s criticism was the feckless and unmoored foreign policy of our 39th president, jimmy carter. convinced that democracy was in and of itself an abstract force for good, the carter administration had supported theoretically liberal uprisings against authoritarian governments that had been allied with the united states from latin america to the middle east. however well-intentioned president carter’s efforts may have been, the result had been, time and time again, material damage to the national security interests of the united states.
“‘dictatorships and double standards’ appeared the same month that the revolutionary leader of the islamic republic of iran, the ayatollah khamenei, who seized power unopposed by the carter administration, had gone on to take more than 50 hostages at the american embassy in tehran, hostages that he would hold for some 444 days.
“ambassador kirkpatrick’s political philosophy had caught the attention of an aspiring republican presidential candidate. ronald reagan, that tireless champion of freedom and human rights, had been grappling with the issue of how to advance the american cause against the soviets when many of our potential partners were not exactly paragons of democratic virtue. reagan understood the hard truths embodied in ‘dictatorships and double standards,’ which was that established liberal democracies were not the only valuable allies for america. they are, rather, the best ones and are to be prioritized, celebrated and fiercely protected. but if we refuse to work with countries that do not meet our democratic standards, who are not making a rapid enough conversion to democracy, but are still helpful to advancing our larger goals to protecting our national security, then we risk fundamentally undermining those goals and so too our national security.
“ronald reagan absorbed this concept without ever losing his passionate belief in freedom. he knew that the real threat was not the occasional dime store dictator but rather the existential threat of totalitarian communism, which was on the march with the stated goal of world domination. and he knew that this is not an either-or dilemma. even as he kept vitally important alliances with the philippines and south korea, he used quiet diplomacy, and sometimes very public diplomacy, to successfully encourage these nations to more democratic practices.
“would it be nice if the progress of liberal democracy was an inevitable, linear evolution in human affairs? and that freedom, once achieved, would be a permanent state of affairs? indeed, it would. but

even a cursory glance at the history of democracy in the some two and a half millennia since the experiment was first attempted in ancient athens, reveals this is far from the case, and the reality is that in order to preserve and strengthen the united states, we cannot treat democracy promotion as an absolute directive; but rather as a highly-desirable ideal – one that can be reached most effectively through the promotion of the security and the interests of the united states.
“we could do worse, in my opinion, than adopting the reagan-kirkpatrick philosophy today. after all, the proof is in the pudding, and it is not an accident that when the american hostages were released on january 20, 1981, they came home not because president carter had allowed the islamic revolution to triumph unopposed, but because now a president reagan was in the white house and the ayatollah knew he would defend america.
“one recent case study that would have interested president reagan and ambassador kirkpatrick was the january 2011 popular uprising in tahir square that ousted hosni mubarak. mubarak made an easy target—an aging military strong man with a grim record on human rights. the fact that he had been for 30 years a staunch ally of the united states and a key partner in securing israel was quickly discounted. the google-fueled revolution was a heady moment that seemed a 21st century rebuke to the repression of the past. mubarak’s fall was hailed as an opportunity for egypt to chart a new and more hopeful democratic future and plans were made for speedy elections.
“when those elections came, however, the results were disastrous for the united states as mohammad morsi, who had close ties with the muslim brotherhood, came to power. but barack obama insisted that all that mattered was that morsi was ‘duly elected’ and for that reason the egyptians should have to suffer under his brutal rule—even while he started to undermine american interests, destroy the egyptian economy, and allow jihadists and weapons to flow from libya into the sinai. while the second uprising of the summer of 2013 would not be the ideal way to change a government, we should all shudder to think what could have happened in egypt had morsi seen out his term. we might well have faced the prospect of egypt on the brink of failure unable or unwilling to protect israel’s borders from the radical islamists that morsi had unleashed. now, under president al-sisi, we have a leader who is aggressively fighting the terrorist cells in sinai and defending his border with libya—and who is not afraid to call out the terrible perversion of his own faith that is causing the violence.
“this past summer i wrote a book entitled ‘a time for truth.’ in that book, i profile a speech president al-sisi gave on january 1 of this year at cairo university. it was a speech in which he called out directly the threat of radical islamic terrorism. it was a speech in which he called out fellow muslims to stand up against the perversion, against the evil that is radical islamic terrorism. for president al-sisi to give this speech as a muslim leader was a demonstration of courage and resolve. that was remarkable. he was quite literally putting a bounty on his own head, and he did so with his eyes open fully aware that the forces of evil he was standing up against would do everything they could to murder him as a result. and yet, as i discuss in the book, what does it say when the president of egypt is more clear-eyed, more candid, more direct, more serious about defeating radical islamic terrorism than is the president of the united states.
“indeed, at that very same university, cairo university, president obama had spoken in 2009 on his so- called ‘world apology tour,’ where he said, among other things, that iran has a right to nuclear power. we need a president who will stand up and unequivocally defend the national security interests of this country.
“another instructive episode was the 2011 nato-led intervention in libya that toppled the repressive dictator muammar qaddafi. he made an even easier target than mubarak—a violent and repressive anti-

american dictator who had sponsored vicious terrorist attacks on american interests, notably the downing of pan am flight 103 over lockerbie, scotland. qaddafi had also long been suspected of pursuing a covert nuclear program that, if successful, would pose a grim threat to the united states. when a popular uprising occurred in the spring of 2011, it seemed a no-brainer to this administration that america would come to the aid of beleaguered rebels, splashed across the international press in fatigues and keffiyehs. the mission seemed almost absurdly easy, one that could be executed with no real american sacrifice— indeed, as the obama administration boasted, we could ‘lead from behind’ and the result would be the establishment of a liberal democracy in libya that would only require administrative steps, such as mobilizing international support for a transitional government and freeing up communications networks. how profoundly wrong that foreign policy view was.
“as it turns out, rather than being aspiring democrats that the obama administration and their allies wanted them to be, the rebels were radical jihadis with limited interest in establishing a civil society. and while it was at the time well-known that qaddafi had abandoned his nuclear program under the very real threat of military intervention that he perceived from the george w. bush administration, it was less well-known that he had begun cooperating with the united states in the fight against those same violent terrorists. that he was actively working to apprehend radical islamic terrorists, to turn them over to america. but once he was gone, things turned for the worse. once he was gone in less than eighteen months, they would overrun our facilities at benghazi, murdering four americans including our ambassador - the first american ambassador killed in the line of duties since the carter administration. today, libya is a failed state controlled by warring terrorist networks that pose a significant threat to our ally egypt and who are openly plotting attacks on our allies in europe.
“the intervention in libya was, in a word, a disaster. and the argument that republicans had to, in principle, support what might have been a democratic uprising against qaddafi, but that the obama administration somehow botched the job is revisionist history - and poor revisionist history at that. this took place in 2011 after the president’s cairo speech, the russian re-set, and the cancelling of the missile defense batteries in poland and the czech republic. it should have been clear to any rational observer that the obama administration was not capable of a policy that would actually defend, and robustly defend, the national security interests of the united states.
“a third example that has dragged on for more than four years is the syrian civil war. once again, there is no doubt that bashir al-assad, like his father was before him, is a bad guy who has been an ally to, and at times a puppet of, iran and an enemy to the united states and to israel. and it may have been that in the spring of 2011, there was a secular, non-violent opposition to assad that would have made his ouster of strategic interest to the united states. but by the time i arrived in congress in 2013, it was clear that far darker forces were at work. in june of that year the economist reported that out of the nine rebel groups that they had identified, seven had significant terrorist ties, a state of affairs that made me deeply cautious about any plan to train and equip them -- for as bad as assad was and is, radical jihadis controlling syria would be a significant turn for the worst.
“nothing that has happened in the last two and a half years has given me any more confidence that intervention in the syrian civil war is in america’s interests. in fact, the situation is now materially worse despite hundreds of millions of dollars the united states has poured into trying to identify and train the syrian opposition as isis now controls a significant portion of the country, while assad is consolidating his position as a vassal of iran and russia.
“quite simply, we do not have a side in the syrian civil war. it’s not very fashionable these days in washington, indeed, it is not difficult to find politicians who will thunder, ‘we must topple assad,’ with the same ferocity with which they thundered, ‘we must topple qaddafi, we must topple mubarak.’ and

we’ve seen the catastrophic results of these myopic policies, and i would note that my view that we don’t have a side in the syrian civil war is shared by at least one other world leader with a clear-eyed and direct vision to what is happening. israel’s prime minister netanyahu was asked when he visited washington last month why he didn’t intervene in the syrian civil war. and he responded simply that he would only do so if he had a clear side, which at this point he did not. he said that an iranian-controlled assad was a disaster for israel—but that so was the islamic state controlling syria. ‘when two of your enemies are fighting each other, i say don’t strengthen one or the other. i say weaken both, or at least don’t intervene, which is what i’ve done.’
“i believe today, we are at a moment like munich in 1938, that president obama has returned from geneva, returned from agreeing to give over $100 billion to the ayatollah khamenei, promising like neville chamberlain peace in our time. history teaches anything, giving hundreds of billions of dollars, strengthening homicidal maniacs who intend to murder you, has never, ever, ever worked out well. and at a time of great peril, we need the churchillian clarity and vision that prime minister netanyahu provides because he doesn’t have the time for the political correctness that so hamstrings the obama administration. i think we should listen to our closest ally in the region, and in the absence of a viable alternative to assad that isn’t isis, i believe we should focus on the immediate and unambiguous challenge to our security, which is utterly destroying isis.
“i understand this flies in the face of conventional wisdom that holds that america must always promote democracy at all costs. some would consider any progression in egypt that did not involve morsi serving out his term as unacceptable. they might consider the terrorist domination of libya as preferable to any outcome that did not oust the dictator qaddafi. they are proclaiming today that those who do not support assad’s ouster are complicit in iranian terrorism. there will always be those who believe it is america’s obligation, as a free nation, to convince others that we are laboring for their freedom, whether they want it or not. there will always be those who believe by insisting on anything less than our own democratic ideals we are forfeiting the moral high ground.
“this is, to borrow ms. kirkpatrick’s elegant phrase, nothing more than confusing ‘revolution with idealism, change with progress.’ we do not betray the idea of america by accepting reality. ronald reagan was the single greatest liberator of human oppression that the world has ever known. he did not do it by forcing democracy on unwilling nations, but by an unwavering determination to defeat communism. after two terms of an obama-clinton foreign policy so disastrous it makes the carter administration look good, we are in a desperate need once again for clarity.
“the clarity of reagan’s four most important words: ‘we win, they lose.’
“we will not win by replacing dictators, as unpleasant as they may be, with terrorists who want to kill us and destroy america. and we can take heart in the knowledge that like reagan we are not abandoning freedom, we are doing what we must to protect it because the true threat to the spread of liberty is the radical islamism that is every bit as oppressive as soviet communism. and while the rebels who oppose regional strongmen who turn out to be jihadis are not ultimately helpful in this cause, there are others who are, and we should be able to figure out the difference. as ambassador kirkpatrick wrote, ‘it may not always be easy to distinguish between democratic and totalitarian agents of change, but it is also not too difficult. authentic democratic revolutionaries aim at securing governments based on the consent of the governed and believe that ordinary men are capable of using freedom, knowing their own interest, [and] choosing leaders.’
“a case in point is perhaps the single greatest blunder of the obama administration and one of its first in 2009—when the president ignored the green revolution in iran, thereby forfeiting an opportunity to

replace the radical islamist, terrorist-sponsoring regime in tehran that chants ‘death to america’ and ‘death to israel’ and pursues nuclear weapons, and instead america could have stood with a peaceful, secular rebellion that was crying out for support from the united states. there was a case where regime change squared up with our most pressing national need. but instead of standing with the iranian people in what could have been his ‘tear down this wall’ moment, instead president obama fell silent and decided to open up negotiations with the mullahs instead.
“so while the paroxysms of the so-called arab spring did not produce a wave of flowering democracies in the middle east, but rather a tsunami of chaos and unrest, including a new an even more virulent strain of radical islamic terrorism most sensationally embodied by isis, there may be future such opportunities that the next president should not squander. we can lead by example and demonstrate the positive effects of democracy. as ambassador kirkpatrick further noted, ‘it is not impossible that u.s. policy could effectively encourage this process of liberalization and democratization, provided that the effort is not made at a time when the incumbent government is fighting for its life against violent adversaries, and that the proposed reforms are aimed at producing gradual change rather than perfect democracy overnight. to accomplish this, policymakers are needed who understand how actual democracies have actually come into being. history is a better guide than good intentions.’ there are a number of encouraging 20th century examples of liberalization that should give us hope. the flourishing, vibrant democracy that is israel is one of the great gifts the last seven decades have bestowed on america. we should not squander it. the end of the cold war produced a unified, democratic germany, as well as the vibrant democracies of eastern europe—all strategic allies and assets to the united states.
“we can most effectively continue this process by embracing our own ideals; by standing unapologetically for freedom; by defending americans here in our country; by having the courage to speak with moral clarity -- to call evil by its name; by unapologetically defending america’s interest around the globe; and by using the bully pulpit of the presidency to invite others to recognize the rights of individuals, to respect them, and to unite against the evil forces who seek to tear down freedom in every corner of the world. thank you.”
wow.  god bless the great state of iowa.  i want to thank each and every one of you for being here.  i want to thank citizens united and my good friend steve king for putting this on.  you know steve and i spent all week in washington, dc  so it is great to be back in america.

we're living in remarkable times.  just a couple of weeks ago, walking down the hall of the capitol, i ran into a janitor carrying a screwdriver, who was coming to change the sign on harry reid's door.

and iowa played a big part in that by sending us joni ernst.

and i for one sure am glad that we have a farmer as chairman of the judiciary committee.

today is the 50th anniversary of winston churchill's passing.  churchill stood as a lion in winter, a voice against the darkness that was sweeping the globe.  and i'll tell you 50 years later we are facing threats every bit as ominous.  and today, like then, we need the clarity of thought and voice and action that churchill provided.  one of the very first acts president obama did upon being elected was sending churchill's bust back to the u.k., and i think that foreshadowed everything that was to come the next six years.

now i'll tell you i'm very happy that here with me today is my wife heidi.  heidi is an incredible mom, she's a fantastic businesswoman, and she is my very best friend in the entire world.  and you know we're blessed to have two little girls at home.  caroline who's six, catherine who's four.  and i'll tell you heidi and i are here for the same reason that all of y'all are here.  because we look at what's happening in this country and we fear for our children; we fear for our grandchildren.

so what i want to talk to you about today is reigniting the miracle of america.  this country was built on an extraordinary miracle.  the miracle of america began with a revolutionary idea, which is that our rights, they don't come from government, they come from god almighty.  and the constitution, it serves as jefferson said, as chains to bind the mischief of government.

this country was built on incredible opportunity that if you're a single mom waiting tables you can do anything; if you're a teenage immigrant washing dishes you can do anything.  there's been no country in the history of the world that has allowed so many millions with nothing to come and seek the unlimited dreams of their potential.

and third, the miracle of america has been american exceptionalism, that we are the indispensable nation, a voice, a clarion voice for freedom and we will back down to no face of tyranny.

now how do we bring that back.  how do we reignite the miracle of america?  it is the most important cause that unifies us together and iowa believes in the miracle of america.

number one we champion jobs and economic growth and opportunity.  we bring back and environment where small businesses are growing. are creating opportunity; we get the senseless obstacles from washington out of the way.  that means tax reform and regulatory reform.  it means sending the locusts of the epa back to washington.  i was once out in west texas and i said, you know the thing about folks from the epa is unlike locusts you can't use pesticide against them, and an old farmer looked at me and said, wanna bet?

and the most important regulatory reform we can do is we need to repeal every word of obamacare.  we need tax reform.  and the most important tax reform we can do is we need to abolish the irs.  we need a simple flat tax that's fair, that every american can fill out his or her taxes on a post card.  there are 110,000 employees at the irs.  we need to padlock that building and put every one of those 110,000 on our southern border.  now i say that somewhat tongue in cheek, but think about it for a second.  imagine you had traveled thousands of miles through central america, through the heat.  you're swimming across the rio grande, and the first thing you see is 110,000 irs agents.  you'd turn around and go home too.

the second key to reigniting the miracle of america is we need to defend our constitutional rights. every single one of them.  the first amendment, the second amendment, the fourth, the fifth, the tenth amendment.  you know no liberty has been more under assault in recent years than religious liberty.  whether it is the federal government going after hobby lobby, a christian company, or going after the little sisters of the poor.  and by the way, here's a real good rule of thumb: if you're litigating against nuns, as the obama administration is, you've probably done something wrong.

you know i'm sorry to say one of the most graphic threats to religious liberty occurred in my home town of houston, where the city of houston subpoenad five pastors and demanded of those pastors hand over your sermons, hand over your sermon notes.

now let me tell you a story that's going to lift up your hearts.  when that happened, that wednesday, i decided we were going to try to bring together a group of pastors to have a rally in defense of religious liberty.  so heidi and i, we're members of first baptist in houston, we called our pastor, pastor greg mott.  and i said pastor, you've seen what's happened with the subpoenas.  he said, oh yeah ted, i've been praying about it all morning.  and i said well listen, we want to hold a rally; we want to bring pastors together; we want to do it tomorrow, thursday at 11 a.m..  and i wanted to ask you, can we do it at the church; would you be willing to host it at the church?

and pastor greg begins laughing.  and he said, you know ted, god sometimes moves in ways we cannot understand long before we have any awareness of it.  he said a month ago, god put it on my heart to begin praying for our city, and a month ago he said, i reached out to pastors across the city of houston and invited them to come to my office to pray for our city.  he said we have 50 pastors from around the city coming to my office tomorrow at 10 a.m..  i'll tell you it took both our breaths away.  and so the next morning i joined those pastors at 10 a.m.; we spent an hour on our knees in prayer for the city.  we then went down to a rally with over 50 pastors from across racial lines, across ethnic lines, across denominational lines.  heck, we even had first baptists and second baptists.  and that ain't easy.

and we stood in that rally together and we said, caeser has no jurisdiction over the pulpit.  and when you subpoena one pastor, you subpoena every pastor.  now i'll tell you believers all over texas, all over the country lifted up the situation.  conservatives spoke out, and the heat and pressure was so great that the city folded under and withdrew the subpoena.  we've got to defend our constitutional liberties.

and third, we need to restore america's leadership in the world.  over the past six years we have seen the fruits of the obama-clinton foreign policy of receding from leadership in the world.  leading from behind doesn't work.  just a couple of weeks ago we were horrified at the terrorist attack in the streets of paris, and then horrified again when over 40 world leaders came in solidarity and yet missing from that rally, graphically, was the united states of america.

you cannot fight and win a war on radical islamic terrorism if you're unwilling to utter the words radical islamic terrorism.  i would note that the depraved men who flew the planes into the twin towers and the pentagon and to that field in pennsylvania, they weren't a bunch of ticked off presbyterians.  i think some of the presbyterians like that.

and you know paris also illustrates that a big ocean doesn't mean we're protected from radical islamic terrorism.  it's one of the reasons i've joined with steve king and chuck grassley to introduce the expatriate terrorist act that says that if an american takes up arms with isis, he forfeits his or her citizenship.

now iowa, iowa plays a unique and special role in the political process.  the men and women gathered here today and across the state, you have a responsibility that you take very seriously to scrutinize any candidate for national office, to look them in the eyes and to hold them to account.  i've got to say a lot of people have the reaction: i don't trust politicians.  and that's worth applauding because i agree with it.  you know in a republican primary every candidate's going to come in front of you and say, i'm the most conservative guy to ever live.  gosh darn it, hoo diddly, i'm conservative.

well you know what, talk is cheap.  the word tells them you shall know them by their fruit.  and one of the most important roles that the men and women in this room, the men and women in iowa will play is to look each candidate in the eye and say, don't talk, show me.

if you say you support liberty, show me where you stood up and fought for it.

if you say you support religious liberty, show me where you stood up and fought for it.

if you say you oppose obamacare, show me where you stood up and fought against it.

if you say you oppose the president's unconstitutional executive amnesty, show me where you stood up and fought.

if you say you support life and you support marriage, show me where you stood up and fought.

if you say you'll stand up to the washington establishment, the career politicians of both parties that have gotten us in this mess, show me where you've stood up and fought.

if you say you oppose common core, show me where you've stood up and fought.

and if you say you stand with our friend and ally the nation of israel, show me where you've stood up and fought.

together, we need to reassemble the reagan coalition.  we need to unify, we need to bring together conservatives and evangelicals and libertarians and republican women and reagan democrats and young people.  we need to bring together a coalition of americans who want to believe again in the miracle of america.

now some might say, this is hard; this is really hard.  the media tells us it can't be done.  the media says give up, abandon hope, go on home.  but you know each of us has seen miracles every day.  we've seen miracles in our own lives, in our own families.  many of y'all here know my father, pastor rafael cruz.

my dad has been my hero my entire life.  when he fled cuba as a teenager with nothing after being imprisoned and tortured he was full of hope and opportunity.  but let me tell you a different aspect of his story you may not have heard.  which is he and my mother moved to canada in the oil and gas business.  the canucks in the room they're giving us some love.

and i'll tell you, when i was born, when i was a little boy neither of my parents knew christ.  both of them were living fast lives, both of them were drinking too much.  and when i was three years old my dad decided he didn't want to be married any more.  he didn't want to be a dad to his three-year old son.  so my father got on a plane and he flew back to houston.  and back in houston he was working in the oil and gas business when a friend and colleague invited him to a bible study and invited him to clay road baptist church.  and he gave his life to jesus.  and it transformed his heart and he went to the airport and he bought a plane ticket and he flew back to calgary, and he flew back to my mother and he flew back to me.

you know some people ask if faith is real.  i can tell you first hand in my family and my life if it were not for the redeeming love, if it were not for faith in jesus christ i would have been raised by a single mom without the love of my father in the household.

men and women all throughout here have experienced miracles just like that in our lives, transforming.  the amazing grace, how sweet the sound that saved a wretch like me.  compared to that the challenges we face in this country are nothing.

from the beginning of this country, god's providential blessing has been on the united states of america.

when we stood up against the mightiest army on the face of the earth and won a revolution as a rag-tag bunch of colonists, it was only with god's blessing that we did so.

when we survived the horrible civil war that ripped us apart to expunge the original sin of slavery, it was only with god's blessing that we came back and were stitched together as a nation.

when we stood with winston churchill to defeat the nazis and the scourge of evil, it was only with god's blessing that we saved freedom on this planet.

and when president reagan stood before the brandenberg gate and said mr. gorbachev tear down this wall, it was only with god's grace and blessing that we won the cold war.

we have done it before over and over again, and we can do it again.  we can come together.   and the answer, the reason i am hopeful, the reason i am optimistic is because of each and every one of you.  the answer is the grassroots, is the american people.  we are working to build a grassroots army all across this country.  the answer will not come from washington; it will only come from the american people.  so i would ask every one of you that has your cell phone, i would ask you on your cell phone to text the word "constitution" to the number 33733.  i'm going to give you that again.  the word "constitution" to the number 33733.  what we're working to do is to bring together that same coalition of men and women across iowa, across this country to say we do not accept losing this country.  we will together reignite the miracle of america; we will together bring back that shining city on a hill that is the united states of america.  thank you and god bless you.
let me first of all say, to god be the glory. tonight is a victory for the grassroots. tonight is a victory for courageous conservatives across iowa, and all across this great nation. tonight the state of iowa has spoken. iowa has sent notice that the republican nominee for the next president of the united states will not be chosen by the media. will not be chosen by the washington establishment. will not be chosen by the lobbyists. but will be chosen by the most incredible powerful force, where all sovereignty resides in our nation by we the people. the american people. tonight, thanks to the incredible hard work of everyone gathered here, of courageous conservatives across the state.

to put in perspective, your incredible victory that you have won tonight. that is the most votes ever cast for any republican primary winner.

tonight is a victory for millions of americans, who have shouldered the burden of seven years of washington deals run amok. tonight is a victory for every american who's watched in display as career politicians in washington in both parties refuse to listen and too often fail to keep their commitments to the people. tonight is a victory for every american who understands that after we survive eight long years of the obama presidency, that no one personality can right the wrongs done by washington. the millions who understand that it is a commitment to the constitution to our shared insistence that we rise and return to a higher standard, the very standard that gave birth to the greatest nation that the world has ever known. to the revolutionary understanding that all men and all women are created equal. that our rights do not come from the democratic party or the republican party or even from the tea party. our rights come from our creator.

and the federal government's role, the federal government's responsibility is to defend those fundamental rights, to defend us. and while americans will continue to suffer under a president who has set an agenda who is causing millions to hurt across this country i want to remind you of the promise of scripture. weeping may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning. iowa has proclaimed to the world, morning is coming. morning is coming. from day one this campaign has been a movement. for millions of americans to organize, to rally, to come together. whatever washington says, they cannot keep the people down, and tonight is a testament to the people's commitments to their yearnings to get back to our core commitments, free market principles. the judeo-christian values that built this great nation. when the washington lobbyists settled on other lobbyists in this race. when the media in one voice said a conservative cannot win, nationwide over 800,000 contributions poured in to tedcruz.org as courageous conservatives said, yes, we can.

800,000 contributions at tedcruz.org with an average contribution of $67. that is the power of the grassroots. but it's more than that. it's 12,000 volunteers here in the state of iowa. it's over 200,000 volunteers all across this great nation. you know, during the course of this campaign people have asked heidi and me are you tired? and i will admit it is 16, 18 hours a day, 6, 7 days a week. we are not tired at all.

to the contrary, we are inspired by each and every one of you. i leap out of bed every morning amazed that at a time when our country is in crisis, every one of us has the opportunity to stand and lead, that we have been put in a place of leadership. for such a time as this.

i'm inspired by the stories of heroism that i see every day, working men, like jerry dunleavy from columbus, ohio. who requested an entire month off his job to come to iowa to live at camp cruz and to volunteer full time. when his employer refused to give him time off, jerry quit his job and came anyway. i love the great state of iowa.

i'm inspired by people like elliott gazer and josh hammer, students at the university of chicago who spent their winter break at camp cruz. but they came back this weekend and hit the phones and they hit the pavement, campaigning to students across this country, upon graduation, rather than having mountains of debt will instead have 2, 3, 4, 5 high-paying job offers and a chance at the american dream. i'm inspired by people like alexandra, a 13-year-old girl from lubbock, texas, who, yesterday, at our campaign headquarters made 823 volunteer calls.

that has always been the strength of this campaign. are the men and women gathered here and courageous conservatives lifting this country up in prayer each and every day. and let me say our leadership team, our iowa state chairman, matt shultz, what an extraordinary job. you have done organizing a grass roots army. let me say to our iowa state director, brian english, what an amazing job brian has done.

and to our national co-chairmen, bob vander plaats and steve king, these men have become dear and trusted friends. they are warriors. they are men of principle. they stand and speak the truth. they stand to defend their values and let me tell you, these leaders, day after day, week after week, have been crawling under broken glass with knives between their teeth. i'm grateful for the support the early support of my friends. we're grateful for the over 150 pastors across the state of iowa who joined our team to energize people of faith. we're grateful to the state senators, to the state representatives, to the volunteer leaders in each of the 99 counties who stood up and said we will be heard and this will be decided by the grass roots. and then, i am so grateful to national leaders, people like dr. james dodson. and tony perkins. and phil robertson. and governor rick perry, and glenn beck. leaders who have stood and led, bringing together conservatives here in iowa and across the country.

do you want to know what scares the washington cartel? actually, not remotely. i don't scare them in the tiniest bit. what scares them is you. what scares them is that old reagan coalition is coming back together, of conservatives. we're seeing conservatives and evangelicals and libertarian and reagan democrats all coming together as one and that terrifies washington, dc. and so do the people of iowa, heidi and i say thank you for your incredible hospitality, for your love, for welcoming us into your homes, into your living rooms. thank you for welcoming my father to preach from the pull pits of your churches. and let me say to my parents, mom, thank you. for the incredible, unconditional love that you have given me every day of my life, the knowledge that whatever i might do, whatever i might say that my mother loves me.

to my cousin, bebe, like a sister to me, we grew up together, i love you, beebs. and to my dad, a man who came from cuba at age 18 with nothing. with $100 in his under wear, he doesn't carry money in his underwear anymore. a man in prisoned, tortured, who washed dishes making $0.50 an hour, who was r would live the american dream and a man who is today a pastor, traveling the country preaching the gospel.

my dad is 76 years old and has the energy of a teenager and dad you have been my hero my whole life. i love you, daddy. when the sun rises tomorrow, this campaign will take the next step. we will continue to campaign the same way, sitting down, person to person, leader to leader, bfw halls, dunkin donuts, returning to the great state of new hampshire. and let me speak for a minute to the men and women of the state of new hampshire. 36 years ago, you welcomed to the granite state a candidate running for president who was also deeply disliked by the washington establishment and the washington cartel. a candidate dismissed out right by the media. some polls had him 15, 20 behind. you refused to let the establishment and media do your thinking for you. you refused to let them tell you how to vote. you wanted a candidate who didn't adopt his position because of the latest opinion polls, but because of a deep and under lying conservative philosophy that grounded him so that he knew exactly what he believed and the principles were that built this great nation. and so tonight i want to say to the people of new hampshire, thank you for what you did 36 years ago. thank you for giving america, and the world, and history our 40th president of the united states, ronald wilson reagan. and i ask the people of new hampshire, and the people of south carolina, and the people of nevada, and the people of the super tuesday states on march 1, to each of you, do not listen to our words. do not listen to the rhetoric from campaigns, but rather, hold everyone of us accountable, hold me accountable and every other candidate accountable to be a consistent conservative.

if you want a candidate to repeal obamacare, then support a candidate who has led the fight to repeal obamacare. if you want a president to stop amnesty, to secure the borders and keep us safe, then support a candidate who has led the fight to stop amnesty to secure the borders and to keep us safe. if you want a candidate to support life and marriage and religious liberty, then support a candidate who spent decades of his life fighting to defend life and marriage and religious liberty. if you want a candidate to defend the second amendment right to keep and bear arms, then ask of every candidate where were you in the spring of 2013 when barack obama and harry reid and chuck schumer tried to undermine the second amendment right to keep and bear arms? if you want a candidate who will stand unapologetically with the nation of israel, then support a candidate who has led the fight over and over again to stand by our friend and ally, the nation of israel. and if you want a commander in chief who will fulfill the most solemn obligation of the president to keep this nation safe, then support a candidate who has demonstrated the commitment, the judgment, the experience, the clarity of vision, to identify our enemy, to call it by its name, radical islamic terrorism. and to utterly and completely defeat isis. if i am elected president, every militant on the face of the planet know, if you go and join isis, if you wage jihad on the united states of america, if you attempt to murder innocent americans you are signing your death warrant.

and i'll tell you this. if the other states across the country follow the lead of the good men and women of iowa, and support this campaign, then, i tell you this. this july, in cleveland, you will hear these words spoken from the podium of the unified republican convention. tonight, i want to say to every member of the democratic party, who believes in limited government, in personal opportunity and the united states constitution, and a safe and secure america, come home. to the reagan democrats, your party has left you. and the republican party wants you, we welcome you back.

because together, this year, republicans and the reagan democrats can send an unmistakable message, the message of a reagan like landslide that will drive the liberal elite and the washington cartel into the potomac and out to sea, never to be seen again. together, we can bring out a new era of economic growth, of military strength, of international security and the future of hope that our children deserve. if we commit to do more than hope, if we aspire to govern by a higher standard that transcends political party and race and gender and income, and to everyone that is tired of a president that divides us daily on racial lines and religious lines, on gender lines, on socioeconomic lines we will have a president that once again seeks to bring us together and unite us on our shared values of who we are as americans. the most solemn responsibility of the president is to keep this country safe. and we will stop the weakness and april -- do what it takes to defeat them. i give you my solemn promise. we will finally, finally, finally, secure the borders and and sanctuary cities.

and i want to speak for a moment to the soldiers and sailors and airmen and marines and moms and dads who have a child serving overseas. and husbands and wives wake up wondering if their loved one is still alive, waiting months upon months to get a hug from mommy, a kiss from mommy. the men and women sent into combat with arms tied behind their back with no idea when it will end in january, 17. you will have a commander in chief who finally has your back. and to the police officers, and the firemen, and the first responders, the heroes who rushed in to burning buildings instead of out of burning buildings, the last seven years of having a president, having an attorney general that demonizes you, that vilifies you, that sides with the criminals land looters instead of the brave men and women of law enforcement, that will end on january 20, 2017. so tonight, the state of iowa, the democrats here seem to be in a virtual tie. between one candidate, who admits he's a socialist, and the other candidate who pretends she's not. i wish them both luck.

but i will tell you this, as margaret thatcher observed the problem with socialism is that you run out of other people's money. and let me tell you tonight...
i have spent all of the last week in washington. it is great to be back in america!   i enjoyed it you saying that you thought new hampshire was ready for hillary. i am told they are trying to get hillary to come speak. unfortunately, they could not find a foreign nation to foot the bill. i will say that we have seen some exciting news. ready for hillary has announced a new director of e-mail security. lois lerner now has a job! i am thrilled to be back in new hampshire with so many friends. i appreciate you being here. these are extraordinary times. they are remarkable times. every one of us is here and we came out tonight because we are deeply concerned about the direction of the country. everyone of us is here because we are concerned about our kids and grandkids. there is, right now, and urgency to perl a -- an urgency to politics unlike anything we have ever seen. the next election is now or never. i do not think we have reached the point of no return yet. we are close. there comes a point where the whole is too deep. there comes a point where the debvt is too great, liberties too far in eroded, the world too far gone. if we continue down the current path, we will risk losing the greatest country in the history of the world. now, the men and women here are assembled because none of us are willing to let that happen. none of us are willing to go quietly into the night. none of us are willing to let go and give up on the united states of america!   you know, to underscore how extraordinary the moment is, for the first time in history, a majority of americans, 60 5%, believe our kids will have a worse life and we do. -- 65%, believe our kids will have a worse life than we do. it may be the most un-american idea there has been. the basic ideal of the 1700s and today has been that our kids will have a better life than we did and their kids will have a better life than that. there is something about that. i want to talk to you about how we turn that around. i want to have a voice of hope and optimism. i think the central challenge in the country going forward is how we reignite the miracle that is america. i am going to suggest we need to do three things to make that happen. number 1 -- bring back jobs and growth. and, opportunity. my number one priority in the senate is economic growth. economic growth is foundational to everything else. i can tell you, across the state of texas, it does not matter if you are in east, west, the panhandle, or the valley. the top priority is growth. that ought to be bipartisan and bring us all together to say, "look, regardless of other issues, if small business is prospering, growing, and creating jobs and opportunities, that lifts all ships." everyone here knows, growth is not come from government. -- does not come from government. it comes from the men and women in this room. the government is awfully good at screwing it up.   and, the most effective levers the government has to facilitate the private sector and small businesses creating jobs are tax reform and regulatory reform. tax reform -- the current irs code has more words than the bible. not a one is as good. i will tell you the best and simplest tax reform. we should abolish the irs.  >> whoo!we should move to a simple flat tax that is fair and let's every american fill out his or her taxes on a postcard. there are agents at the irs. we need to padlock the building and put all 110,000 agents on the southern border. now, i say that somewhat tongue-in-cheek to our friends from the fourth estate. imagine you traveled thousands of miles in the blazing sun, you are swimming across the rio grande and the first thing you see is 110. ,000 irs agents, you would turn around and go home, too!    when it comes to regulatory reform, we have seen, over the last six years, federal regulators to on small businesses like locusts. i was in west texas. i said, the only difference -- you cannot use pesticide on the regulators. a texas farmer said, want to bet? i have to admit, the kind of seems like an attitude people in the north would understand. the single most important regulatory reform is repealing every word of obama care. -- obamacare.  look, it is a train wreck, a disaster. five years ago, reasonable minds could have differed. today, we have seen millions lose their jobs, millions forced into part-time work, millions losing her health insurance, their doctors, hang higher premiums -- paying higher premiums. i was in brass go. thousands of people out in north platte -- i was in nebraska. thousands of people were out in north platte. she said, i am a single mom and have six kids. my husband left me and is not paying child support. she says, i am working five different jobs. not a one of them is 30 hours a week because obamacare kicks in. she started to choke up. she said, i am having a hard time keeping the clothing on the back of my children. the single hardest thing is that i never get to see my kids. i go from job to job. they do not get the mom they need and deserve. look, that is who we are fighting for. that is who obamacare is hurting. it is the people struggling to achieve a better life. the first priority needs to be to bring back jobs, growth, and opportunity. the second priority is to defend the constitutional liberties.  all of them. the first amendment. the right to free speech. the irs has been demanding citizen groups to tell what books they are reading, the content of their prayers. you know what? the federal government has no business.  look at the assault on religious liberty. it was manifested in my hometown when, a few months ago, houston subpoenaed five pastors. it issued subpoenas to hand over sermons. if i had gone on fox news and said, the government is going to come and subpoena pastors, they would have dismissed me as a black helicopter conspiracy cook. they were ordering the sermons. let me tell you a story that will lift you up. it was wednesday of that week and i called our pastor. we are members of first baptist. i called pastor greg. he said, i saw what happened and i have been praying about it. i said, we want to organize a rally of pastors throughout the city of houston to stand for religious liberty at 11:00 a.m. i want to ask if it is ok to host the rally. my pastor begins laughing and says, you know, ted, scripture says god orders our steps before we are aware of it. got put all my heart that we needed to pray for the sinners. i reached out and asked pastors to come pray for the city. there are 50 pastors coming to my office tomorrow at 10:00 a.m. i have to tell you, that was powerful. we are both sitting there going, "wow." we dropped to our knees and prayed for the city for an hour. we had 50 pastors across racial, ethnic, the nomination aligns. -- the nomination on -- denominational lines. we even had a first and second baptist preachers. that ain't easy. we said they had no jurisdiction. when you subpoena one pastor, you subpoena every pastor. the light and heat and attention that came down on the city of houston was so intense that, within a week, the city withdrew the subpoenas and abandoned the challenge altogether. we are a country that is founded on religious liberty. the federal government should not becoming after it. we defend the second amendment. nobody here likes the second amendment? i was going to say, i do not believe that for a minute. i am pretty sure that new hampshire's definition of gun control is kind of like texas. it means hitting what you aim at. we need to defend the fourth and fifth amendments. the right to privacy. >> that's right! >> that's right!  how many of you have your cell phones? leave your cell phones on.i want to make sure that president obama hears every word we say. we need to defend the 10th amendment. or, as obama calls it, "what?" the fundamental protection that says the powers not given to the federal government are reserved to the states or to the people. that means that certain core functions of the federal government need to be done well. we need to secure the border. there are certain function as the federal government has no business sticking its nose in the middle of and, at the top of the list is education. -- and, at the top of the list, is education. we need to repeal every word of common core. besides, we have a common core and the country called the constitution of the united states! we need to restore leadership in the world. for six years, we have seen the consequences of the obama-clinton foreign-policy, leading from behind. it is a manifest disaster. america receded from leadership in the world. we have abandoned our friends and allies. and, in her enemies no longer fear or respect us. -- and, our enemies no longer fear or respect us. you cannot win a war on islamic terrorism with a president who is not willing to utter the words. just a few weeks ago, following the horrific terrorist attack in paris,, described -- in paris, obama described it as a random act of violence. when someone goes into a kosher deli seeking to murder jews because of their jewish faith, there is nothing random about it. likewise, a few weeks ago, 21 coptic christians in egypt were beheaded. the white house said that 21 citizens have been murdered because of their egyptian citizenship. they were not murdered the kids they work egyptian. -- because they work egyptian. -- were egyptian. they were murdered because of their christian faith. the pope said their blood confesses jesus christ. the gravest threat facing the national security of america today is the threat of iran of acquiring nuclear weapons. i was honored to sit on the floor of representatives -- on the floor of the house of representatives and listen to netanyahu, who gave an extraordinary address. walking out, what struck me is hearing echoes of history. we are hearing the echoes of munich in 1938. the adjective most frequently used to netanyahu is church -- he is speaking with a moral gravity. members of congress said to me, that is what a real leader sounds like. now, instead of greeting our friend and ally, the white house threw a temper tantrum and refused to meet with the prime minister. he said, he did not even watch the speech. heidi and i have a four-year-old and a six-year-old and we are familiar with the strategy of "i can't hear you." the president of the united states ought to be above that. and then, this past week, i was proud to join with 46 other senators in sending a letter to iran. i'm not sure about it. i get the sense the white house is upset. the president publicly said he was embarrassed for the 47 senators. i have to admit, i was like, "hot diggity damn, he can be embarrassed about something?" watching of the hysterical reaction of the democrats and folks the words of shakespeare. me thinks she doth protest too much. the letter to iran said a straightforward fact. under the constitution, there are only two ways something can become a law, the president to negotiate a treaty he submits to the senate and it is ratified by two thirds of the senate or, congress can pass a law that the president signed into law. those of the only two ways to make a law. if the president does not submit it to congress, the agreement is not binding of the united states of america. now, it is really a sad thing that such a letter was necessary. >> that's right. that's exactly right.  is there anyone here in junior high? let's go high school.all right, high school. you are all taught in high school the constitution. the treaty has to go to the senate and get confirmed. [inaudible]  they are nodding. you are definitely nodfdding emphatically. obama has been the most lawless president this country has ever seen. >> amen!  the president has repeatedly said he will not follow the understanding of the constitution that any student in junior high or high school civics has. he is going to submit the very bad deal with iran to congress for ratification. that is lawless and it prompted a letter to make clear the constitution is still the law of the united states of america. the follow-up in response to the 47 senators saying, follow the constitution. the white house is floating that the president will take the lousy deal with iran that accelerates iran acquiring -- that was eric holder. the administration is very unhappy with this line of argument. instead of submitting it to congress, the white house is saying they will go to the united nations. they will try to end run congress and the american people. the iranian foreign minister issued a lecture on international law. don't you understand international law? it binds nations and, if the president agrees to it, there is nothing you can do about it. i will note that this is a topic i happen to have more than a little bit of history with. before i was elected, i was the solicitor general of texas and the chief lawyer for the state in front of the supreme court. i served 5. 5 years and texas led the nation defending conservative principles before the supreme court. we defended the 10 commandments monument on the capitol grounds and won 5-4. we defended the pledge of allegiance and the words, "one nation under god,." we won unanimously. we defended the second amendment and won 5-4. we defended new hampshire's parental notification law before the u.s. supreme court and won unanimously. of all of the battles, the biggest is a horrific crime. to teenage girls murdered in houston. the judicial arm of the united nations issued an order to the united states to reopen the convictions of 51 murders across the country. it was the first time a foreign court has tried to bind the u.s. justice system. i argued before the supreme court twice. on the other side was the world court, the united nations, and 94 and nations that came in against the state of texas. on the other side, i am sorry to tell you, was the president of the united states. it was not president obama. it was president bush. listen, i think george bush is a good man, an honorable man, in this instance, he signed an order that attempted to order state courts to obey the world court. i have to admit it is an unusual situation for the state of texas to be litigating against the president of the united states, who is a texan, a former governor of texas, a republican, and a friend. yety, i sat down with the attorney general and stood before the supreme court with george w. bush's lawyer on the other side. we argued that the united nations and the world court has no authority over our justice system. >> that's right!   no president of the united states, democrat or republican, can give up the sovereignty of the american people. we won,, 6-3. this deal matters for a lot of reasons. it is an acute threat to the national security. and is the next essential threat to the nation of israel. -- and it is an x es existential threat to the nation of israel. i do not mean a french man. it is a grave threat to the national security of this country. new hampshire will play a critical role in the 20 16th elections. -- in the 2016 elections. any candidate who shows up in front of you, republican or democrat, asked the simple question, if obama negotiates a bad deal with iran that undermines national security and makes it more likely that iran gets nuclear weapons, will you repudiate that? >> that's right!   any candidate who is not what to put the vital national security above partisan interests is not fit to be commander-in-chief of the country. i want to close with two points. number one, i told you i am optimistic. scripture's tell us there is nothing new under the sun. i think where we are today is much like the late 1970's. i think the similarities between obama and carter are uncanny. same disastrous economic policies, same misery, stagnation, malaise, same feckless, arrogant, and naive for policy -- foreign policy. nations openly laughing at and mocking the president of the united states. the one person in america thrilled with the job obama is doing is jimmy carter. >> that is not good!  that is tough to do. let me tell you why it gives me so much hope and optimism. the story had a happy ending. we remember what happened in the late 1970's and 1980. the grassroot movement swept the country, millions came together and became the reagan revolution. it did not come from washington. washington despised ronald reagan. if you see a candidate who washington embraces, run and hide.   it came from the american people and swept up as a tsunami. and turned the country around. we went from stagnant growth to booming growth at 7. 2% a year with millions lifted out of poverty and into prosperity and the american dream. i want you to imagine for a second, for some of you who might think some of the things i am saying our audacious. abolish the irs, really? >> yes! >> really!  in washington, that is viewed as out there. repeal obamacare, really? i want you to imagine we are all in the room in 1979 and ronald reagan walked up to the podium and told each of you, we are going to take the top marginal tax rate of 70% and cut it to 28%. we are going to take the stagnant economic growth for four years, averaging less than 1%, and bring it to 7. 2%. we will bring hostages from iran. they will be released when i am in office. we will end the cold war, rebuild the military, and tear the berlin wall to the ground. according to washington reasoning, that is nuts. you cannot do any of that. everyone in washington knows this. compare that to abolishing the irs and repealing obamacare. that eight nothing . -- ain't nothing. the same thing that is happening in 1980 is happening today. everywhere you go, people are standing up, waking up, realizing what is happening to the country. the same thing is happening today that happened then. i am optimistic because of each and every one of you. it is each of them men and women in this room. if you look to washington, there is nothing but despair and despond and see. if you look -- despondency. if you look to the american people, there is hope. i am trying to empower the american people. i encourage you to send a text. text the word constitution to the number 33733. i'm going to give that to you again. text the word, "constitution," to the number 33733. we are only going to turn this around i building a grassroots movement in new hampshire and in the states across the country. the last thing i want to share with you is, for every one of us , liberty is not some abstract concept. it is not something we read about in school books. it is something personal to your family and my family. it is very real to who we are. in my family, my dad was born in cuba. he fought in the revolution as a teenager. anyone here 14? you are 14. remind me your name. kirsten. my dad started fighting in the cuban revolution and was in student council in high school. the revolution in cuba was mostly fought by ted's. -- kids. when my dad was 17, he was thrown in prison and tortured. batista's army beat him almost to death. he fled. 18, when my dad was 18, he arrived in america. he could not speaking flesh. he had nothing -- he could not speak english. he had nothing but $100 in his underwear. i do not advise carrying money in your underwear. his first job was washing dishes. imagine being in a strange country where you know nobody, you are penniless and alone, and filled with dreams and passions. he ended up paying his way through school, starting a small business, and is a pastor in texas. my dad has been my hero. dian know what i find most incredible about his story? how commonplace it is. every single one of us could come up and tell a story just like that. whether it is us, our parents, or our great grandparents, what ties americans together is that we are the children of those who risk everything for freedom. that is the fundamental dna of what it means to be an american, valuing freedom and opportunity above all else. live free or die. that sums up what it means to be american. when i was a kid, my father would say to me, over and over, when we face depression in cuba, i had a place to flee to. if we lose our freedom here, where do we go? the men and women are here because we will not go quietly into the night. we will rise up and save the shining city on a hill that is the united states of america.  >> why do we have to wait so long to get rid of obama? in the media, i do not care what station you go to, the guy is getting crucified. why can we not do better?  we should have won in 2008 and 2012. we should be standing with all of our might to stop the out-of-control obama agenda. i think people are frustrated all over the country. the biggest divide we have in the country is not between republicans and democrats. the biggest divide in the country is between career politicians in washington in both parties and the american people. >> yes!  the avenue for turning things around does not rely on washington. it is the american people rising up to hold every elected  let me quote "jerry mcguire. " you had me at hello. we should close the department of education because education is too important to be governed by an elected -- unelected bureaucrats in washington. education should be at the state or local level. every one of us should have the input in the curriculum. if you do not like what is being taught, you can go down to the local principal, school board and make your views known. if they do not listen to you, decide you are going to run. you can have direct impact. on the other hand, if education decisions are decided by a bureaucrat, he or she does not care what you and i think. it needs to be close to the people because it is too important an education should reflect the values of the community at the local level. >> people say to you, we understand that you we need health care reform and it should follow basic principles. it should expand competition in the marketplace. it should empower patients and consumers. it should disempower government bureaucrats. here are specific proposals that manifest those principles. we should allow people to purchase health insurance across state lines. what that will do is create a true 50-state national marketplace, driving down cost and enabling able to buy low-cost catastrophic insurance policies. every single one of us wants to see more people covered and the number one barrier is cost. you want more coverage, . the second concrete reform is expanding health savings accounts. people can save in a tax-advantaged way. and, third, we need to work to de-link health insurance from employment. it is a historical accident health insurance is tied to employment. it rose out of world war ii. employers could not use higher salaries and began offering perks and benefits. the tax code favor that. we do not live in the 1950's. most people do not work for a company for 40 years, retire, and get a gold watch. will live in a transient time. -- we live in a transient time. if you or i lose our jobs, we do not lose our life, car, or house insurance. there is no reason you should lose your health insurance. that is the number one cause of pre-existing conditions. someone loses insurance and cannot get a new policy. every policy is free market and keeps the government the heck out of the doctor's office. >> i am from vermont. a great question. they are the face of evil. they are crucifying christians. they use race as a weapon of war. i was sitting down with the president of kurdistan. a man told him in tears that isi s raped his mother, his sister, and his wife. how can i live with myself? at the same time we are seeing such barbarism, we are seeing obama acting as an apologist for radical islamic terrorism. i was at a washington prayer breakfast several weeks ago. the president equated what isis is doing to the crusades and the inquisition. the last i checked, the crusades started over 1000 years ago. and, and did 700 years ago. -- and, ended 700 years ago. i do not think it is too much to ask the president to stay in the current millennium. if there were christians seeking out and murdering others because their faith differed, you and i would readily and roundly condemn that. if there were jews seeking out and murdering others because the faith differed, we would condemn that. there is a grotesque for version called radical islamic terrorism. not every muslim stop it is a dangerous political philosophy of jihad. the reason i say apologist. some in the media were astonished. the apologist gives rationalizations, explanations, and justifications for the behavior. the comparison to the crusades is one the terrorists are fond of making and it does not help to have the president of the united states to say there is a moral equivalency in all of this. you have people locking men and women in cages and lighting them on fire. that is evil. your question was what we should do about it. we need to do absolutely everything necessary to destroy that. what does that entail? difficult to say, 21 months from now, where we will be. let me answer now. i cannot predict the military condition in 2017. right now, we ought to be using overwhelming air power to destroy isis. we should be arming the kudrds. the fighting forces have been there and have stood with the united states for decades. they are effective fighters and fighting isis right now. they have american weaponry they seized in iraq. the administration will not arm the kurds. they send it to baghdad and baghdad will not give it to the kurds. that does not make any sense. there is a more broad debate about if we should have american boots on the ground. if you had an effective plan, you would need embedded special forces. i do not think boots on the ground is a political question. you have some and politics who say never and others who say we have to. in my view, it is driven by the military objective tied to the national security. we should do what ever is necessary to destroy isis.   the spokesperson from the state department recently said, we cannot solve isis by killing them up we need to get them jobs. -- killing them. we need to get them jobs. there comes a point where you cannot make fun of this anymore. saturday night live had a classic episode of rumsfeld doing a press conference. [captioning performed by the national captioning institute, which is responsible for its caption content and accuracy. visit ncicap. org] a reporter said, is it unfair that you are dropping big bombs on the television? -- tali this administration doesn't seem to understand. >> can any elected official be a progressive and swear to protect and defend the constitution of the united states without committing perjury? >> look, it is a great question. it. and let me give an example of what i mean by that. look, one of the saddest things in modern times, there used to be a tradition of scoop jackson democrats that would stand up to their own party, stand up to their own country. there used to be a tradition na democrats would stand up to their own leader. one of the saddest aspect is the complete aspect of any democrat in the senate that will stand up to president obama and his lawlessness. you ask if anyone can be a progressive and still uphold the constitution? one thing that was not widely reported but happened last year -- it's the single thing that made me the most in the senate. is they introduced an amendment to repeal the free speech protection to the first amendment. and every single senate democrat voted to repeal the free speech protection. now, i gave a senate floor speech in defense of free speech where i said where are the liberals? there was a time when democrats stood for civil liberties. i had a picture of george washington next to me. scared my dad. he said he's gone native. ted kennedy opposed what he said was we haven't amended the bill of rights in over 200 years. now is no time to start. when i called out on the senate floor where are the ted kennedys? is there not one lion in the left that will stand for free speech? it is hard breaking. let me try to wrap it up because i'm getting the hard hook. let me wrap it into a final point which is as extreme as it is, that is part of why i'm so optimistic. sometimes things have to get really bad to wake people up and people have wakeen up all over this country. they realize what we're doing doesn't make sense. the obama economy. people are hurting. obamacare is a disaster. in washington things are viewed through a weird lens. what do i believe in? live within your means. don't bankrupt your kids and grandkids. follow the constitution. it is only in washington, d.c. that those are viewed as extreme and radical propositions. precisely because things have gotten so bad that's why people are waking up. that's why i am here. i am honored to be with you to encourage you and to thank you because we're fighting together for your kids and mine. we're fighting together to turn this country around. god bless you.  >>
thank you. good to see you. well, god bless the great state of new hampshire. so i'm the only thing standing between you and happy hour. [laughter]

well, i'm thrilled to be back with so many friends here in new hampshire. it is lovely. last time i was here just a couple of weeks ago, there was snow everywhere. so springtime is here.

you know, i have to say, as i was coming up, i was a little bit startled because i could have sworn i saw hillary's scooby doo van outside. well — and then i realized it couldn't possibly be that, because i'm pretty sure you all don't have any foreign nations paying speakers, right?

what an incredible gathering this is. what a testament. i mean, has this not been an incredible array of strong conservative leaders for two solid days?

what a testament to the desire for americans. we want something new. we want new leadership to change the page and to turn around.

you know, the democratic version of this i'm pretty sure is hillary clinton having a conversation with a chipotle clerk. and that says something about where the passion and energy is here in new hampshire and all across this country.

everyone of us understands this is a time of crisis. our nation is in crisis. and yet, we don't want to go back to the failed policies of the past. we want to go forward to the future. so i want to talk about how collectively 20 months from now, we're going to turn this country around.

everyone of us is going to come together and re-ignite the promise of america. we're going to get back to the country that everyone of us was blessed to grow up in, a country where our kids will have a better life than we did and their kids will have a better life than they did.

there are three simple steps to re-igniting the promise of america. number one, bringing back jobs and growth and opportunity. my number one priority in the u.s. senate from day one has been economic growth. and we know how to do that. we do that through tax reform and regulatory reform. on tax reform, we need a simple flat tax so that every american can fill out his or her taxes on a postcard.

and then we need to abolish the irs.

there's nearly 90,000 employees at the irs. we need to padlock that building, take everyone of them and put them on our southern border.

now, to our friends in the media, i say that somewhat tongue-in-cheek. but think about it for a second. imagine you had traveled thousands of miles through the blazing sun. you swim across the rio grande. the first thing you see is 90,000 irs agents. you'd turn around and go home, too.

and then regulatory reform . you know, i was out talking to a bunch of farmers in west texas, and i asked them, what's the difference between regulators and locusts? i said, well, the thing is, you can't use pesticide on the regulators. this old farmer leaned back and said, want to bet? and the most important regulatory reform is we need to repeal every word of "obamacare."

the second key to re-igniting the promise of america is defending our constitutional liberties, all of them.

defending the first amendment, our free speech rights, our religious liberty rights. and you know, we're in a time where some in this country shy away from defending religious liberty, are afraid to defend the very first right protected in the first amendment of the bill of rights. i'll tell you, i am proud to stand with men and women of faith across this country defending our religious liberties.

we need to defend the second amendment, the right to keep and bear arms.

and i have to say, today, the new york times is having a bit of apoplexy. that, of course, is such an unusual reaction for the new york times. and in particular, they're very dismayed because when i was asked about the second amendment, you know, the second amendment is not designed to protect hunting or sports shooting. those are wonderful things, but that's not what the second amendment is about. the second amendment is about protecting our natural rights from god to protect our lives, our families, and our homes.

and it is also fundamentally about a check on tyranny from government and a protection of liberty of the people.

now, i'm not shocked in the live free or die state, that you all understand what i'm talking about. but the new york times today said that that notion, live free or die, that the second amendment is a check on tyranny, they said it was strange. it was silly. it was ridiculous. it was absurd.

let me tell you some other strange, silly, ridiculous, absurd people. thomas jefferson, george washington, james madison, justice joseph story, who said the second amendment is the palladium of our liberties. i'll tell you, i'm proud to stand with our founding fathers for our liberties against the received wisdom of the new york times.

we need to defend the fourth and fifth amendments, our privacy. and we need to defend the 10th amendment, or as president obama calls it, the what? the fundamental protection that says those rights not given to the federal government are reserved to the states and to the people.

that means there are core areas that are given to our federal government that they need to do and do well, they need to need to protect this country, stand with the military, secure our borders. but there are other areas where the federal government has no business sticking its nose. areas like education.

and we need to repeal every word of common core.  but the third and critical piece to re-igniting the promise of america is restoring america's leadership in the world. and i want to take a few minutes focusing on this issue in particular on the foreign policy and national security threats facing this country.

on friday, i was honored to be down at fort hood, where finally, finally, finally, after more than five years, purple hearts were awarded to the soldiers who were shot by nidal hasan.

over five years ago, he committed that terrorist act. and yet, for this entire time, they've been denied the purple hearts that they were owed because the obama administration characterized that attack as, quote, "workplace violence." i'll tell you one of the things i'm most proud of is last year in the united states senate, i introduced legislation mandating that those soldiers finally receive the purple hearts to which they were due.

we were able to win bipartisan support, bring together every republican and every democrat on the senate armed services committee in support of my amendment. we passed it unanimously over the objections of the obama pentagon. and in december, it became law, which is why on friday, five years too late, they were finally recognized for their heroism and bravery.

at the ceremony over and over again, as i looked at young soldiers, the sentiment i expressed to each of them was, i'm sorry. i'm sorry this took five years. i'm sorry the government — and by the way, nidal hasan was in communications with anwar al-awlaki, a known radical islamic terrorist and cleric, asking about the permissibility of waging jihad on his fellow soldiers.

when hasan walked through fort hood, murdering 14 innocent souls, including an unborn child, he yelled out allahu akbar as he did. and yet, in the administration's eyes, they could not acknowledge this was radical islamic terrorism. if we want to turn things around, if we want to restore american leadership in the world, the first thing we've got to do is tell the truth.

you cannot defeat radical islamic terrorism with a president and an administration unwilling to utter the words radical islamic terrorism. you know, we all remember in paris just a few months ago, the horrible terrorist attack that occurred there, that the president referred to as a quote, "random act of violence."

there is nothing random when radical islamists with butcher knives go into a kosher deli seeking to murder jews because of their jewish faith. it is a naked act of anti-semitism. and it's inexplicable that this administration want to acknowledge that. likewise, our hearts were broken when 21 coptic christians in egypt were beheaded by isis. once again, the white house put out a statement saying, those 21 lost their lives because of their egyptian citizenship. that was not why they were beheaded. they were beheaded because they were christians. as pope francis powerfully said, their blood confesses jesus christ.

the next 20 months are going to be a dangerous time. the next 20 months are going to be hobbesian state of nature. it's going to be like "lord of the flies." but let me tell you something, january 2017 is coming. twenty months from now, imagine a commander in chief who stands up with utter clarity and says, we will destroy radical islamic terrorism.

imagine a president who stands with our allies, whether it is the u.k. or france. and we all remember just a few months ago, seeing over 40 world leaders walking arm-in-arm in solidarity with france against radical islamic terrorism, and where oh where oh where was the united states of america? you know, if only the terrorists attacked a golf course...

...that might actually get the white house's attention. holy cow, this is serious. imagine a president in 2017 who says we'll stand with our friends and ally, the nation of canada, and we will finally build the keystone pipeline.

instead of a president who boycotts prime minister netanyahu, imagine america standing unapologetically alongside the nation of israel.

and the single greatest national security threat facing america today is the threat of a nuclear iran. this deal the president is pushing forward is a terrible deal. it is a historic mistake. and any candidate for president who is fit to be commander in chief must be prepared in january 2017 to repudiate any deal that undermines american national security.

it is utterly unacceptable and profoundly dangerous for a nation whose leaders lead the people in chants of death to america — and by the way, that's a national holiday in iran. you know, here, we have thanksgiving, fourth of july, christmas. there, every year, they celebrate death to america day. it is the anniversary of iran taking americans hostage. supreme leader khamenei goes out to the huddled masses, and together, they chant, "death to america." if history teaches any principle, it is that if somebody tells you they want to kill you, believe them.

you know, a few weeks ago, i was proud to join with 46 other senators signing a letter to the nation of iran.

one of those senators was new hampshire's very own, senator kelly ayotte.

and i'm amused the far left seems to think it's a campaign issue to use against kelly. good gosh, kelly stood against iran getting nukes. you know what, i'd encourage them to run with that idea. that's going to be a terrific campaign issue.

but shortly thereafter, i went on msnbc, "morning joe." and they were kind of slightly upset, apoplectic, much like the white house. why did you sign this letter? do you regret signing this letter? mind you, this is a letter that explains to khamenei that under our constitution, there are two ways and two ways only something becomes a law in the united states of america.

either you have a treaty signed by the president that is ratified by two-thirds of the senate, or you have a law that passes both houses of congress and is signed into law by the president. if you do neither of those, it ain't a law.

now, iran's foreign minister zarif responded and said, no, no, no, no, no, you do not understand. under international law, a head of state has the authority to bind his nation forever and in perpetuity on any issue he wishes. and you know what? in the nation of iran, that's correct. if someone in iran disagrees with the edicts of the supreme leader khamenei, they will take you and shoot you.

but one of the great blessings of the united states of america is we don't have a supreme leader in this nation.

and so on msnbc, when they asked if i regretted signing the letter, my response was my only regret is like john hancock, that i didn't make my signature bigger so the ayatollah can read it without his reading glasses.

you know, i am so grateful to be back with each and every one of you. it was 58 years ago that my father fled cuba. he'd been imprisoned. he'd been tortured. when he came to america, he couldn't speak english. he was a teenager. he was 18 years old. he was washing dishes making 50 cents an hour. and he was filled with hopes and dreams, the same hopes and dreams that everyone of us, everyone of our parents, everyone of our grandparents had and have. that is the miracle of america, that no nation in the history of the world is allowed so many millions of people to come with nothing and achieve anything. and it's why we will turn this country around.

if you look at the fundamental dna of americans, we are all the children of those who risked everything for freedom. when i was a kid, my dad used to ask me over and over again. when we faced oppression in cuba, i had a place to flee to. if we lose our freedom here, where do we go?

that's why the men and women are gathered here today, because not a one of us is prepared to lose our freedom. we are standing in defense of liberty, in defense of the constitution, in defense of america.

and with that, i'm happy to answer any question you like. yes, sir, in the back?

q: thank you very much, senator. as you know, there will be a vote coming up shortly for a new attorney general.

cruz: yes.

q: and i'd like to know if you can tell us what your vote will be, for or against loretta lynch.

cruz: sir, thank — thank you for that question. my vote on loretta lynch is going to be unambiguously no.

and let me tell you why very briefly. i sit on the senate judiciary committee. so i took a very active part in ms. lynch's confirmation. now, when she was nominated, to be honest, i very much wanted to support the nomination. eric holder has been the most partisan, abusive attorney general in the history of our country.

and yet as ms. lynch sat through her confirmation hearings, i asked over and over again, number one, if she would support the president's illegal and unconstitutional executive amnesty. she said absolutely yes.

i asked if there were any limits to this executive amnesty, could the president of the united states run amnesty not just to the 4 million people that he's illegally granted amnesty to, but all 12 million people living illegally in this country. she refused to answer that question. she refused to acknowledge any limits on the president's authority.

i pushed a little harder. i said, could the president — so your theory that's basing all of this is prosecutorial discretion, that the president could decline to prosecute laws. i said, could the next president instruct his or her treasury secretary, under the theory of prosecutorial discretion we will no longer collect any taxes in this country above 25 percent. she refused to answer that question.

now look, i think that's great policy, but the way to pass it is pass it through congress and make it a law.

and i tried to go even further. i tried to come up with what was truly an absurd hypothetical. sitting next to me in the judiciary committee was my colleague, john cornyn from texas. so i said, imagine, ms. lynch, in 2017, president john cornyn. could that president using prosecutorial discretion announce that the federal government will no longer force — enforce any federal environmental laws or any federal labor laws against any citizen of the state of texas? she refused to answer that question.

in my view, when you have an attorney general nominee who looks at the united states senate and says he or she will not enforce any constitutional limits whatsoever on the power of the president, there is no way in good conscience and consistent with your oath to vote to confirm such a nominee.

yes, sir.

gould: hold on, make my way back to you. senator, because we have a wedding coming in, this will have to be the last question because a young couple is getting married at 5:00 in this room.

cruz: oh, wonderful.

q: senator, if you were sitting in the white house right now, what specifically would you do in order to deal with the islamic threat throughout the middle east, islamic state specifically?

cruz: yes, a terrific question. what would i do in the white house right now to deal with isis? we need a clear-eyed commander in chief who number one, sets the objective. and the objective is not to weaken, it's not to degrade isis. it is to utterly and completely destroy isis.

they are the face of evil. they are crucifying children. they are beheading christians. they are lighting men and women on fire in cages. now, when you've set that clear objective, militarily, what would be required?

number one, we should be using overwhelming airpower directed at taking out isis in every location.

number two, we should be arming the kurds.

the kurds have long been our allies. they are on the ground. the peshmerga, the fighting forces for the kurds, are effective soldiers. they're right now fighting isis, right now, today. and they're hopelessly outclassed in their weapons because isis is using american military equipment they seized in iraq. and the obama administration refused to fund the kurds, instead, sends weaponry to baghdad that won't pass it onto the kurds.

now, there is a debate going on right now about boots on the ground. now, my view at the outset is any military conflict, particularly extended military conflict, should begin with a congressional authorization or even better, a declaration of war.

on the question of boots on the ground, i don't think that should be decided by a bunch of politicians in washington posturing one way or another for political effect. it should be driven by the military necessities of accomplishing the goal of destroying isis.

so based on the advice i've received from senior military leaders, the peshmerga on the ground armed effectively with overwhelming military force and perhaps some embedded u.s. special forces can at least begin to carry out that task. what is missing, though, let me describe an exchange i had with the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff last year.

i asked him, i said, if the objective were to destroy isis in 90 days, militarily, what would be required? and he said, well, i'm sorry, that — that's impossible. that cannot be accomplished.

i said, ok, general dempsey, perhaps that timeframe is unrealistic. you tell me then, in what timeframe can we destroy isis and what would be required to do so? his answer was, there is no military solution to this problem. the answer is to change the underlying conditions on the ground so people are not susceptive to being radicalized through poverty. now, with all respect, there is a word for that. and i'll clean it up for c-span and say it's simply nonsense.

the way to defeat isis is not expanded medicaid throughout iraq. the way to defeat isis is a simple and clear military objective that the leaders of isis and the soldiers of isis who are waging war on america, we will destroy them.

and i'll make one final point in terms of what we need to do. last year, i introduced in the senate, legislation called the expatriate terrorist act. roughly 100 americans have traveled to the middle east, have taken up arms and joined isis, the legislation i introduced that said, any american citizen that does so, that takes up arms with radical terrorists and declares jihad on america forfeits his or her citizenship.

just this week, we apprehended an ohio man who traveled to join isis, to train with isis and came back to america to wage jihad, to blow up u.s. military facilities, and thank god, we caught him. but it is lunacy to allow terrorists waging jihad to come into this country with u.s. passports. and we should come together to prevent it.

thank you and god bless you.
thank you so very much carly for your incredible friendship and leadership. god bless new york and god bless the commonwealth of pennsylvania.

i am so excited to share with you what america has learned over the past few months.

and it has nothing to do with a politician tonight winning his home state.

it has everything to do with what we've seen in the towns and faces that have been weathered with trouble, joblessness, and fear. it is what we learned looking at the factories that have been shuttered and the hearts that are closing.

we have learned that america is at a point of choosing.

the media will say it is about choosing a president.

but it really isn't.

our real choice is personal, and every generation must make the same choice.

will we continue to live in the past with what we know no longer works, or will we move forward to a new and better place?

the people in state after state have made it clear.  they cry out for a new path.

this is the year of the outsider.

i am an outsider, bernie sanders is an outsider.

both with the same diagnosis, but both with very different paths to healing.

millions of americans have chosen one of these outsiders. our campaigns don't find our fuel in bundlers and special interests, but rather directly from the people.  the wide-eyed youth of any age that haven't given up on the hope that tomorrow can and will be better.

ronald reagan and jack kennedy were outsiders.

they both represented a whole new vision and vibrancy.

a new generation of ideas.

jack kennedy looked forward instead of back to the first half century of world war.

he knew that america could dream and build if we were set free.

not tanks for war, but rockets for exploration.

reagan looked out — to us - the most powerful force for innovation that the world has ever known:

there we found the new tech pioneers like bill gates and a young steve jobs.  they had vision and the freedom to build a new world that that at the time only they saw and because they were free. they challenged the way and changed the way all of us live, work, and interact.

now it is our turn.

this generation must first look inward to see who we really are, after years of being beaten down.

years of being told we couldn't, shouldn't, or wouldn't.

this generation needs to answer a new set of questions.

can we? should we? will we?

are we still those people?

those dreamers and doers?

are america's greatest generations in our past?

or are our best days yet ahead?

we must unite the republican party because doing so is the first step toward uniting all americans.

the question is not whether all americans can or will agree on a majority of issues all of the time.  the question is whether a majority of americans are hungry to rally around a set of principles larger than any single issue that a politician may use to divide us.

tonight, i'm speaking to you from philadelphia.  it's natural, when we talk about our nation's earliest days, that we focus our attention on the declaration of independence and the constitution.  and we can learn a great deal about a path forward by focusing on the passionate disputes and disagreements among our founding fathers — differences that were put aside only because of the weight and consequence of the foundational principles they sought to proclaim and the price to be paid if they failed to rise to the task.

today, as republicans, we agree on a lot.  and sure, areas of lesser agreement exist as well.  but on the fundamental question: are we satisfied with the current direction of our country; we speak with one voice.

i call on you, as jfk did in the 60's.

and as reagan did in the 80's.

to chart a new american journey forward.

one that isn't led by me or anyone in washington, but by you.

and millions of others just like you.

one where we still have differences, yet we choose to concentrate on what we have in common.

one that lifts others up and believes in the rights, responsibilities, goodness, and strength of all mankind.

we have so much that binds us together: our families, our work ethic, our ability to dream and build unlike any people in history. but most of all our charity, our love for our fellow men and women and our willingness to sacrifice for those in need.

let us unite…on the things that have always made us great.

we are great because we are good.

because over and over again we have chosen courage in the moments of crisis; freedom in the face of compromise; and hope in the face of challenges that everyone told us could not be overcome.

our sitting president ran on a slogan that should have been a great first step…

it promised us, "yes we can."

now is the time to take that slogan and put it into action.

"yes we can" was a recognition of the hope that we can and should recover. the problem was that barack obama's prescriptions only led to more elitist control from washington.  less freedom for the people.

but now is the time, as americans, to once again reclaim that hope.

to take another giant leap for mankind.

to speak the words with all the power and might that we can muster and use the words that have changed the world time and again:

the words that the slaves yearned to hear from the american people and abraham lincoln when they cried out for freedom.

the words, that europe and britain heard when they cried out for help defeating totalitarian evil in the 1940's.

the words that led two men in north carolina to be the first in flight.

and half a century later the first man to reach the moon.

and decades later, two men in their garage to come up with apple.

they are the words that will repair our tattered spirit, lift up our economy and those who are barely making it, they are the words that will vanquish the evil of isis. and return the rule of law.

they are the words that when americans come together and say with conviction — they change the world.

they are the vision of this campaign:

not yes we can, but now: yes we will.

we will restore our spirit;

we will free our minds and imagination;

we will create a new and better world;

we will bring back jobs, freedom, and security;

we will find new ways to ignite an energy revolution with more jobs and greater choices;

we will defeat the evil of islamists and isis;

we will live as neighbors, friends, and family in peace once again;

we will heal the sick, feed the poor, and defend the defenseless;

we will restore our rightful place in the world.

we will do what americans do best.

we will live for others - we will change the world through the hope of freedom's enduring promise. and our unrelenting spirit.

you can be empowered, and in a digital age it is all the easier for your voice to be heard.  your choices to govern your work, your education, your future.  if only washington will get out of the way.

join me on this journey of less talk and more action because i know you. you may have been knocked down, but america has always been best when she is lying down with her back on the mat and the crowd has given the final count.  it is time for us to get up, shake it off and be who we were destined to be.

don't let anyone try to convince you otherwise.

here is the truth:  you don't need me or any politician.

but we do need each other, all of us, coming together as one, as we the people, because not only do we say — yes we can, beginning here and now we pledge to each and every one of us, yes we will.

and now my friends, onward to victory.
oh, we remain the same great country we always have been, but the supreme court decisions of last week, two in a row, did enormous damage to this country. it is not healthy for our democracy when judges on our supreme court are violating their judicial oath. and in both the obamacare decision and the marriage decision, the justices decided that they wanted to rewrite federal law and rewrite the constitution.

that's not the way our constitution operates and it is a sad moment for the court when you have judges seizing authority that does not belong to them. the proper way to make policy decisions under our constitution in america is for the people to do so through the democratic process. and last week, the justices short-circuited that.


 it's not. and as you know from my book, i've known john roberts for 20 years now. he's an extraordinarily talented lawyer. and he's someone who knows very well when he's changing the language of a statute. and what's sad on obamacare, the court has done this twice in just a few years.

the first time, chief justice roberts rewrote obamacare and turned a penalty into a tax. the statute was very explicit that it was a penalty. and they magically pulled out an eraser and changed that to a tax. and indeed, you'll recall when obamacare was being debated, the president of the united states, president obama, told the american people it's not a tax. and yet john roberts magically saved the statute by writing the word "tax" in.

well, this last week, he did it once again. the statute says that the subsidies and the mandates and the taxes, all of them apply only if there is an exchange established by the state. and what chief justice roberts did is took out an eraser, crossed out those words, and put in place defined an exchange established by the federal government as an exchange established by a state.

as justice scalia powerfully said in dissent, words have no meaning if the court can simply rewrite a statute because it wants to force this failed law on millions of americans who are now paying illegal taxes because the court has become legislators.


 well, it underscores one of the points really at the heart of my book, which is that the problem we have is not democrats versus republicans. it is a washington cartel. i've said many times the biggest divide we have politically is not between republicans and democrats. it's between career politicians in both parties and the american people.

and what we have seen in recent years in washington is all three branches of government violating the law and violating the constitution. barack obama is the most lawless president we've ever seen. the supreme court, egregiously this past week, is rewriting federal laws and rewriting the constitution. and sadly, congress acquiesces. and the entire point of the book, "a time for truth," is to tell the inside perspective of what's going on in the united states senate; the fights.

and as you know, the opening chapter is entitled "mendacity." and i'm not talking about democrats when i say that. it is the mendacity of republicans who join with democrats. you know, steve, you don't get an $18 trillion debt without a whole lot of bipartisan cooperation.


just the other day, you predicted that in response to the supreme court rulings that your fellow republicans, republican party leaders, would pretend to be incensed, but then do, quote, "absolutely nothing." what makes you think that your fellow republican leaders are so cynical?

 because they agree with the rulings from last week, both the obamacare ruling and the marriage ruling. this is why men and women across this country are so frustrated. i'll tell you, i just flew in from iowa this morning. in iowa, each town hall i ask people: how many people are frustrated with republican leaders? every hand goes up.

and it's because on election day, republicans campaign saying they're opposed to obamacare. they support marriage. they'll defend the rule of law. they'll defend the constitution. and they get to washington and they're part of the washington cartel.

with respect to the obamacare decision, a whole lot of republicans in washington are thrilled that they don't have to deal with the issue in congress. and even better, they can blame the court for it. and with respect to marriage, you know, it's been stunning. republican presidential candidate after republican presidential candidate have put out statements that have said this is the law of the land; we must accept it and move on. those are word for word the talking points of barack obama. and this is why so many men and women are frustrated.

what i've tried to do in politics is two very simple things: tell the truth and do what i said i would do. it says something about washington, d.c. that those are considered radical acts.


 well, look, this country is always changing. but — but my point about the supreme court is the supreme court didn't wait for the country to change. five unelected lawyers overruled 320 million americans. justice scalia in dissent said these five unelected lawyers in robes have become the rulers of 320 million americans.

steve, you may well on policy grounds agree with the supreme court's decision. if you had a referendum, you may well vote for gay marriage. well, under our constitution, there's a way to make policy changes. the proper way to make policy changes is for you to convince your fellow citizens that there is a better policy outcome than the current one. and then in state legislatures, for those state legislatures to vote that change.

from the beginning of our country, marriage has been a question for the state legislatures elected by the people. and what we're seeing with this supreme court is they're deciding their elite radical views trump the views of the american people.


 yes.

 not remotely. and i said them both, so i addressed them one at a time. so my first comment on obamacare is that the supreme court's decision has made 2016 a referendum on repealing every word of obamacare. and that 2016 candidates who are not prepared to stand up and lead that fight should step aside.

but then i directly addressed the court's marriage decisions.


 i most assuredly have.


 and so what i've said, number one, i've introduced a constitutional amendment to restore the authority of the states to define marriage as the union of one man and one woman. number two, i've introduced legislation in the united states congress to strip the federal courts of jurisdiction for attacks on marriage. the constitution explicitly gives congress the authority to strip jurisdiction as a check and balance against judicial overreach.

but number three, this week in response to both of these decisions, i have called for another constitutional amendment, this one that would make members of the supreme court subject to periodic judicial retention elections as a very real check. twenty states have retention elections they put in place if judges overstep their bounds, violate the constitution, and the people have a check to remove them from office.

i've called for that change. that is very much front and center, something i intend to campaign on. and marriage and religious liberty are going to be integral, i believe, to motivating the american people to come out and vote for what's ultimately restoring our constitutional system.


how would having judicial elections make judges any less responsive to changes in public opinion?


i agree that the supreme court follows the opinions of manhattan and washington, d.c., but it doesn't follow the opinions of america. there is a reason why this assault on marriage has occurred primarily in the courts of law and not at the ballot box: because when it goes to the ballot box, the american people vote no.

it's worth remembering just a few years ago, the windsor decision from the supreme court. it struck down a referendum that the people of california — now, california is not a conservative state. it is not a red state. california's a bright, bright blue state. and yet when california put a referendum, just a few years ago, on about the ballot about whether marriage should remain the union of one man and one woman, a majority of californians voted to preserve traditional marriage.

and then...


 it may well, or it may not. that was just a few years ago.

one of the interesting things is — do you know some of the groups that voted most overwhelmingly for traditional marriage? they were african-americans and hispanics. as an hispanic man, as the son of a cuban immigrant, i can tell you in the hispanic community, marriage and life and faith and values resonate powerfully.

and — and the suggestion you had that the court is following public opinion, you know what? if public opinion were already there...


 the court follows elite opinion, not public opinion. and — and part of the problem that my book lays out is democratic leaders in congress and republican leaders in congress follow elite opinion as well. it's what i've called "the washington cartel." it's all — it is career politicians in both parties. it is lobbyists and giant corporations.

and if you look at what's happened in the last decade, the rich have gotten richer. today, the top 1 percent of our country earn a higher share of our income than any year since — since 1928. giant corporations have gotten bigger.

obamacare, under obamacare, what's happened? the insurance companies are making historic levels of profits.

dodd-frank, dodd-frank was sold to the american people as stopping "too big to fail." what has happened? the big banks have gotten even bigger, and small banks and community banks go out of — out of business.

all of this is an example of the washington, and these court decisions are one manifestation of that washington elite forcing its radical views on — on what folks otherwise view as fly-over country.

if the values had changed so much, there would be no need for the court to act, because people would've acted democratically to change their marriage laws. that hadn't happened, which is why the court stepped in and thrown out the laws that the people did adopt.


as you know, there are some republicans who have been talking in general terms of somehow defying the court's ruling.

would you encourage state or federal officials who disagree with that ruling to ignore it or defy it in any way?

 you know, you're right, that the final paragraph of justice scalia's dissent was an ominous paragraph. what justice scalia was saying was that these decisions are fundamentally illegitimate, that his colleagues on the court are not following their oaths.

now, the way our constitutional system works, the courts that have the authority to decide cases and controversies between particular individuals. but there is no obligation on others in government to accept the court as the final arbiter of every constitutional question. indeed, every officer takes an oath to uphold the constitution.

and steve, as you know, i — i don't — i don't say this lightly, and i don't suggest judicial retention elections lightly. i began my career as a law clerk on the united states supreme court.

one of the things that i talk about in considerable length in — in the book, "a time for truth," is my time clerking at the u.s. supreme court, getting to know the justices personally, seeing the decision making, what goes on behind closed doors.

really, throughout the book, what i endeavor to do is shine a light on what happens at the court, both as a law clerk and then, for north a decade, as a litigator litigating and winning major cases in front of the supreme court over and over and over again.

and then i endeavor to do the same thing in the united states senate, which is shine a light on what's happening behind closed doors in — in the back-door deal making that so many americans understand is going on but they don't quite understand how or why, but they know that — that our elected leaders are lying to us.


 indeed.


but did...

 and for your listeners, what that particular anecdote is, is — is that david souter would have, actually, for lunch every day yogurt.

and — and one of the nice traditions of the court, when you're clerking at the court, is each of the justices would have lunch with the justices for another — with the clerks for another justice. so you got to have lunch with each — each of the other justices.

and — and david souter, a very ascetic new hampshire man, would have yogurt each day for lunch, and then on the weekends, he'd put fruit in the yogurt. and — and i observe in the book, i said it struck me that presumably if he put — put fruit in on the weekend, he preferred it with fruit. and yet, nonetheless, he chose to deny himself the pleasure of strawberries or blueberries or whatever fruit he might prefer during the week.


 they should feel no obligation to agree that the court ruling is right or is consistent with the constitution.

this ruling...


 they cannot ignore a direct judicial order. the parties to a case cannot ignore a direct judicial order. but it does not mean that those who are not parties to case are bound by a judicial order.

and that's what justice scalia was saying in his dissent, which is that the court depends upon the remainder of government trusting that it is faithfully applying the law and — and these judges and justices are disregarding their oaths.

this is — the entire premise of the decision on marriage was that in 1868, when the people of the united states ratified the 14th amendment, that we were somehow silently and unawares striking down every marriage law across the country.

that's a preposterous notion. that is not law. that is not even dressed up as law.

now listen, reasonable minds can disagree as a policy matter. should gay marriage be allowed. i suspect you and i would disagree on that policy matter.

part of the genius of our framers is they set up a system to resolve the policy matters, and that system is we can engage in the democratic process, you can make arguments in support of whatever forms of marriage you embrace and others can make other arguments and our elected officials decide.

what this decision is, and both of these decisions are, are decisions from the washington elites that they know better than the american people, that it doesn't matter whether the american people agree with them or not, they're going to force their radical views on them, and that's — that's really unfortunate.


did i understand you to say just now that as you read the law, as you read our system, this decision is not binding on the entire country, only to the specific states that were named in the — in the suit.

 article iii of the constitution gives the court the authority to resolve cases and controversies. those cases and controversies, when they're resolved, when you're facing a judicial order, the parties to that suit are bound it. those who are not parties to the suit are not bound by it.

now, in subsequent litigation, other courts will follow the precedence of the court, but a judicial order only binds those to whom it is directed, those who are parties to the suit. that's the way our litigation system works.

now, this is what justice scalia was talking about in his dissent, which is that it has been the case that on a great many issues, others have largely acquiesced, even if they were not parties to the case.

but there's no legal obligation to acquiesce to anything other than a court judgment. and i would note that the next major battlefield that is going to occur following this marriage decision is religious liberty.

and there are a number of pastors who are publicly saying that if the courts attempt to order them to violate their faith, that they will defy the orders of the court and go to prison for it. that shows just how far we've gotten from the bill of rights and our constitution.

you know, i'll give you an example, steve. two weeks ago, i was in iowa, and — and i met with a couple there named dick and betty odegaard (ph). it's a delightful couple, an older couple, that a number of years back, they purchased an historic lutheran church, and they began hosting weddings in the church.

and — and they started a small business that — that was their livelihood, where they would cater the weddings, and they set up a flower shop, and they would put on weddings. they did this for a number of years until two men came and wanted to have a gay wedding in their church.

now, the odegaards (ph) are devout mennonites, and they explained to these two men that it was contrary to their faith. for them to host and celebrate a gay wedding would be contrary to their religious beliefs and faith.

the next day, they were sued. they were dragged out through prolonged litigation. they ended up paying $5,000 to settle the suit. and they also made a promise they would never again host another wedding.

when i met with the odegaards (ph) two weeks ago, dick and betty were in tears. they are shutting down their business.

now, one of the consequences of this, they have several employees, several employees who work in the catering business, in — in the flower shop®md+in¯®mdnm¯, they've all lost their jobs. and that was for following their faith and religious liberty.

and there is an intolerance in the left that seeks to force people of faith to knuckle under and embrace, and that's fundamentally wrong, steve.

society has no right to force a jewish rabbi to perform a christian wedding. society has no right to force a muslim imam to perform a jewish wedding.

and under the bill of rights, under the first amendment — we're a nation that was founded by people fleeing religious persecution. and it is fundamentally wrong.

but the next battleground will be efforts, litigation efforts, to persecute those, whether they are christians or jews or muslims or mormons or people of faith, who believe in a biblical definition of marriage, the union of one man and one woman — the next battle will be the litigation battles to persecute them, to find them.

and i believe — and — and you talked about 2016 — i believe 2016 will be a religious-liberty election, because i have spent almost my entire adult life fighting to defend the religious liberty of every american to follow his or her faith and live according to his conscience.


but you go on to say that you decided to re-make yourself. what did you do?

 well, it was — it was an interesting background. i was growing up in houston. in grade school and junior high, i was, i guess you would say, a geek. i was academically very good at school but was not a good athlete and was not popular in junior high. and then i spent a great deal of time thinking about, ok, what do the popular kids do that's different. and i began modifying my behavior to emulate — to try and be popular. and i enjoyed some modicum of success.

now, some of it was nature and puberty, so between eighth and ninth, i grew, i think, six, seven inches. i got my braces off. i got contacts. i went to a dermatologist and my acne cleaned up. you know, things a lot of teenagers can relate to. and indeed, i...


 i even changed my name, which was an interesting thing. my full name is rafael edward cruz, and in spanish, the diminutive is ito. and so for a junior, you add ito and so the nickname for rafael, you put ito and you get rafaelito. and then typically you drop the ra. and so my name from when i was — from birth until i was, i think, about 12 was felito, felito cruz.

now the problem with that is that it rhymes with every major corn chip on the market — doritos, tostitos, burritos, cheetos, which sadly, young children were fond of pointing out. and my mother — i remember — my mom and i are very close. i remember my mom suggesting to me when i was, i think, 11 or 12, that if i wanted, i could change my name.

my middle name's edward. we went through all the choices i could go by. i could go by rafael or ralph or raff or edward or eddie or ted. and just ted sounded like me.

but you mention i also changed behavior. i did things like i hadn't participated in sports, i went out for all the sports teams, and i played football and basketball and soccer, and i was horrible because i hadn't played in elementary school or junior high. but i was at a small school, and so they would let anyone who want to play. and frankly, it was some simple things like just treating people nicely, which — some of that's maturity in life.

but it was an interesting transformation where, when i got to high school, i was elected class president two years in a row and was a leader in a lot of school activities. and one of the things i talk about in the book is having been, as a grade school kid and junior high kid unpopular and then having changed my behavior to become more popular, it taught me a lesson that popularity isn't the end-all, be-all. that what matters far more is that you stick to your principles, that you stand up and you live a life of integrity.

one of the problems in washington — and this is something i talk about in great length in the book, "a time for truth" — is there are far too many politicians in washington who desperately just want to get re-elected.

you know, there's an old joke that politics is hollywood for ugly people. and that explains why, over and over again, they're afraid to stand up and lead because they don't want to lose their election and the money and power in washington is what gets them re-elected.

i think we are at a time of crisis, which is why — i mean, the book is entitled "a time for truth." i think our nation faces enormous challenges, and we need leaders who are willing to tell the truth and do the right thing regardless of the consequences.

 well steve, you're right that i described going to bush campaign. so when i was in my late 20s, i left my job, packed up everything i owned and moved to austin to join the 2000 bush campaign. and i think the best part of the campaign was i met my wife, heidi, who is my best friend in the world. she is incredible. she is beautiful, she's brilliant, she's the daughter of missionaries.

but i do describe how, on the campaign, i found myself slipping into old habits. and i had been very successful — i'd been very successful at school, i had gone to top schools, which no one in my family ever had. i had clerked on the supreme court, i had a successful law practice. and when i was on the bush campaign, i was very cocky, and i paid a price for that.

i desperately wanted to have a senior position in the administration. but i had burned a lot of bridges on the campaign, and so that was not in the offing. and one of the things i describe in the book is how i went through a very difficult year the first year of the bush administration, where i had worked incredibly hard.

but it's interesting. heidi, i mentioned my wife. you know, a lot of times your spouse sees things about you that you don't necessarily see. heidi is convinced that my personality changed in a very fundamental way in that period. and one of the things i describe in the book, i needed to get my teeth kicked in. i needed not to be as cocky as i had been on the campaign.

and i — and i mention in the book, you know, a terrific country song is "some of god's greatest gifts are unanswered prayers." and i point out if i had gotten what i wanted, if i had gone to a senior white house position in the bush administration, two things would have happened. number one, i undoubtedly would have been ensnared in some of the many mistakes of the bush administration, and i chronicle quite a few of those in the book where the administration deviated from the conservative principles that the president had campaigned on. but number two, if i had gotten that, i never would have been elected to the united states senate.

you know, one of the great things about our democratic process, the way you get elected, particularly in a grassroots campaign like the one that i ran in texas and the run — the one that i'm running now nationally is you go to hundreds of ihops and denny's and vfw halls and you sit down and talk with people. and here's a real simple rule of thumb. if you're an arrogant little snot, you ain't going to win because the people you're talking to are the salt of the earth. they're truck drivers, they're plumbers, they're schoolteachers, they're working men and women.

and what we saw when i ran for senate in texas, what we're seeing on the ground in iowa, in new hampshire and south carolina is that old reagan coalition coming together. people — we're seeing conservatives and libertarians and evangelicals and young people and hispanics and african-americans and jewish voters and women and reagan democrats. and i think — as i point out in the book, i think god knew what he was doing when he allowed me to get my teeth kicked in on the bush campaign and not achieve the success that i so badly wanted because i need to learn some lessons.


 absolutely. and it's interesting, because the attacks that are leveled in washington, they go through almost an alice in wonderland, through the looking glass, inversion.


 indeed, what they're doing often, is projecting their own conduct. so, the opening chapter of the book, which is entitled, "mendacity," it describes the fight over the debt ceiling and it simple described what happened behind the closed doors.

so, it started with president obama demanding what's called a clean debt ceiling, he wanted trillions more in debt, with more spending reforms whatsoever. now, that was an audacious demand, but it wasn't surprising. i mean, we could have anticipated that's where the president would start. although, when george w. bush was president, he decried raising the debt ceiling and voted against it every time.

even so, it wasn't shocking that when shoe was on the other foot, he wanted trillions more in debt with no spending reforms. what was shocking was what house republican leadership did, house republican leadership decided to join with 192 democrats in passing a clean debt ceiling. they rolled over virtually, every republican in the house.

and what was even more shocking was what happened in the senate. so, the week the senate took it up, every week the senate is in session the republicans have lunch together, tuesday, wednesday, and thursday. that tuesday lunch, it began. the ordinary rules of the senate are in order to move to proceed to take up a debt ceiling, takes 60 votes. that's the way the senate has operated for decades.

it's also true that any rule in the senate can be changed by unanimous consent. but unanimous consent, as the name suggests, takes the affirmative agreement of all 100 senators.

that tuesday lunch began with our leadership saying, "we're asking every republican senator here, to affirmatively consent to lower the threshold for harry reid to take up the debt ceiling, from 60 votes to 50 votes. and we were told, everyone of you should agree for two reasons.

number one, if we do this, it will happen, and hallelujah, hallelujah, that's what we want. we want trillions more in debt with no spending reforms, because we're scared of this issue. we don't want to have a political fight on this.

but number two, if we do this, the democrats will have the votes to do it on their own, which means all of us republicans can vote no. and we can go home and tell our constituents, we opposed the thing we just consented to allow happen.

now, i was sitting there — to be honest, i hadn't gone to lunch intending to pick a fight, but as i listened to that, i was astonished and i raised my hand, and i said, "there's no universe in which i can consent to doing that. i spent two years campaigning across texas, telling texas, if you elect me, i'll fight with every breath in my body to stop the out of control spending and debt that are bankrupting our kids and grandkids."

if were to do that, i think it would be both dishonest and unfaithful to the men and women who elected me.


 it's not a question of tactics. it's, are you honoring the commitments you make to the men and women back home. and it is, for the next three days, the republican senators yelled and screamed at me throughout the lunch. now, i didn't raise my voice in response.

at one point, one of them said, "why are you trying to throw five republicans under the bus?" because, to get to 60 votes, five republicans would have to vote with the democrats. i said, "listen, i'm not trying to throw any republicans under the bus. it's leadership that's asking you to jump under the bus. everyone of you told your constituents the exact same thing that i did, all i'm asking you to do is actually do what you said you would do."

and one of the things i describe in the book, "a time for truth," is i describe the grassroots campaign that i was elected to the senate against all odds. you know, some commentators suggest the odds are daunting in the presidential race. to be honest, in the senate race, there wasn't practically a soul on earth who thought we had a prayer. i started at two percent in the polls.

and it was a 50 million dollar primary where we outspent three to one. but what i described as a grassroots campaign across the state, young people, hispanics, working men and women, they would grab me by the shoulder, and steve, they'd say, "ted, please don't go to washington and become one of them."

the reason i objected to the debt ceiling is because i couldn't go back and look those men and women in the eyes if i had done that — if they had asked why did you agree to make it easier for barack obama and harry reid to add trillions in debt with no spending reforms? i couldn't answer them honestly, so i had to say, i object to that, because i'm going to honor the commitment.


you even described trying to game out which lower court judge you'd like to be a clerk for, because that might be the right stepping stone to the supreme court.

you're now in a situation where you're trying to step up to a big job again. can you game that out for us? you must have thought about this step by step by step in the same way. how do you get from where you are, six through seven through eighth in the polls, to the republican nomination?

 well, there are two different things. there is principle, and then there are the particular campaign steps of building a campaign. i'm a big believer that good policy is good politics. and so, when it comes to making decisions on policy issues, what i endeavor to do is simply speak the truth.

one of the things in the book, "a time for truth," that i describe as the principles and values i believe in, have been consistent for four decades. that these are the exact same principles and values when i was a teenager traveling the state of texas speaking about the constitution and free market principles, it's the same principles i am speaking about today.

that these have been a live long commitment. and, you know, one of the things that's unfortunate in the world of media, is there is a tendency to look at everyone cynically. and i get it, listen, there's a lot to be cynical about in politics. and so, inevitably the explanation for any course of conduct, is so-and-so is being political.

it never occurs — you know, occam's razor says that the simplest explanation is usually the right one. it never occurs to the observers in the media that when i stood up and filibustered for 21 hours against obamacare and fought with every breath in my body to stop that disastrous law, it was because i actually believe it is hurting millions of americans, it has cost millions of americans their jobs, it has forced them into part-time work, it has cost them their doctors, their health insurance, it has caused millions of people's premiums to skyrocket.

and so, in terms of the campaign, what i am endeavoring to do is simply speak the truth, speak common-sense values, free market principles and the constitution. for every question, the constitution is my touchstone.

now, in terms of the tactics, the particular steps, sure. we are essentially replicating the very same tactics that we carried out successfully in the senate campaign, which is a grassroots campaign traveling on the ground, building support from the people, one person after the other, after the other, uniting the disparate parts of the reagan coalition.

i'll give you an example of how that's happening. we launched the campaign just a couple of months ago. in the couple of months since the campaign has been in existence over 100,000 people from all 50 states have gone to tedcruz.org, have contributed to the campaign, have signed up to volunteer, are supporting the campaign.

it is an incredible movement from the people, and i'll tell you, it's the exact same thing we saw in the senate race. in the senate race in texas, all the lobbyists in the state were against us, just about all the elected officials were against us, just about all the corporations were against us, just about all the trade associations were against us.

my opponent was the sitting lieutenant governor who controlled the state senate. so, if you had business in front of the legislature, you had to be against us. and yet, our support was a grassroots movement.

you know, one of the things i describe in the book, "a time for truth," is the model for our campaign was barack obama's 2008 primary victory over hillary clinton. hillary, like my opponent in the senate race, was this unstoppable primary juggernaut, with all the money and the bundlers and the infrastructure. and obama ran a grassroots guerrilla campaign and circled her.

it was breath taking. i went and bought a copy of barack obama's campaign manager, david plouffe, his book, "the audacity to win." gave it to our senior team, said, "we are going to do exactly this and shamelessly emulate it." and we went from two percent, to not just winning, but winning the primary by 14 points, winning the general election by 16 points.


 you know, the nice thing is, when you describe a course of conduct, then others can choose if they want to follow that course of conduct or behave differently. i would be thrilled if all three of the individuals you listed and every other candidate, stood up and said, "we're going to fight."

now, i'm not optimistic they'll do that, but i would be thrilled. and it's one of the ways to distinguish in this field, you know, in a republican primary, every candidate always, always, always says he or she is super conservative. that's why primary voters are so cynical.

in the 2016 primary, you're going to have 15 candidates going, "i'm conservative! no, no, i'm conservative." and what we see is they go to washington, and they don't do what they said they would do.

and so, what i've suggested to primary voters across the country is two things. number one, rather than tell me, show me. if you say you oppose obamacare, show me where you stood up and fought to stop it. if you say you oppose president obama's unconstitutional executive amnesty, or you support free speech or religious liberty, you support the second amendment, or you support privacy or oppose common core, show me where you have stood and fought for those principles.

but a second point that i think is very important, it is very easy for republicans politicians to stand up and say they oppose barack obama, that's not hard to do. i think the question that republican primary voters should ask is, when have you stood up against the washington cartel? when have you stood up against leaders in our own party?

and it's interesting. there are a couple of candidates who can say, well, i have taken on leaders in the republican party. from the left. so there's some candidates who can say, "i embraced amnesty."

and you know what, the reality is, if a republican attacks republicans from the left, the media, npr, will lionize them. any republican attacking the republican leadership from the left will be described as a wise, bipartisan statesmen.

but what i'm asking primary voters is, when have you ever stood with the people in the constitution against the washington cartel? and i think that is a real point of distinction in this field.


 we may have to agree to disagree on that.



 they are not, so i am wearing brown ostrich boots. my argument boots are black ostrich boots, so i usually wear those with a suit, but today i'm in jeans, and so, same basic style, but different pair of boots.

 so, it's a pair of boots, black ostrich lucchese boots that, when i was the solicitor general of texas, the chief lawyer for the state in front of the u.s. supreme court, that i wore for almost every argument that i did as solicitor general.

and i say almost, because there is a rather embarrassing exception, which is the first time i argued in front of the united states supreme court, which was october 7th, 2003, i was 32 years old at the time. i was preparing for the argument, my former boss and very close friend and mentor, chief justice rehnquist, was presiding.

and chief justice rehnquist was a real stickler for attire. he had more than once reprimanded counsel for attire — for example, if you wore a brown suit, you might get reprimanded. and as i was getting ready for my first argument, even though i was very close to the chief, i did not want to stand up on the podium and have the first words i heard be, "uh, counsel, that footwear is not appropriate for this courtroom."

so i describe in the book how, much to my chagrin, i lacked the courage of my convictions, i left my argument boots in the closet and i pulled out an old pair of wingtips that were covered in dust, shined them up and wore them for my first argument. and for my first several arguments in front of the u.s. supreme court, i wore the wingtips.

now, when chief justice rehnquist passed away, i was a pallbearer at his funeral. chief justice roberts was also a pallbearer at his funeral. and shortly thereafter, i was visiting with the new chief justice, roberts, who i've known many, many years. and i guess i was feeling a little cheeky, because i asked him, i said, "mr. chief justice, do you have a view on the appropriateness of boots as footwear at oral argument?"

and chief justice roberts laughed, and he said, "ted, if you're representing the state of texas, they are not only appropriate, they are required." and ever since then, i wore my argument boots at every argument, including the u.s. supreme court.

now, there's an epilogue to that. i've also worn those argument boots every day on the floor of senate. sadly, with one exception, which is when i did the 21-hour filibuster on obamacare.

and before i started that filibuster, my friend rand paul had given me some advice. he had done a very lengthy filibuster on drones that i had supported him in. and rand had two bits of advice for the filibuster. he said number one, wear comfortable shoes, which he didn't do. he said his feet hurt for two weeks. and he said number two, drink very little water, because you're not allowed to leave the floor to go to the bathroom.

and so before the filibuster, again shamefully, i went and bought a pair of black tennis shoes, and midway through the filibuster, i admitted to c-span and to 27 million texans that i had again lacked the courage of my convictions, i wasn't wearing my arguments but instead black tennis shoes. but i can tell you, as my legs cramped up in the 18th and 19th and 20th hour, i sure was grateful for those tennis shoes.
the vast majority of you are from iowa and we want to say thank you for coming out tonight, joining with us to rally for religious liberties. this is a serious topic that we're discussing tonight. most of us, many of us are, descendants of people who left other countries, generations ago, to escape religious percushion. to come to a country to celebrate religious freedom and our families could worship god in a way that was not mandated by the government, that was not controlled by somebody else outside of their own conscious and their understanding of what god called them to do and to live the sort of live that god called them to live. we live in a country that was handed to us by those patriots who took great risks to leave their homes and to come to america. they gave us a place where we could raise families, like the ones you just saw. weren't they great? [applause] if you're like me, when you watch those young people, sing and play and use their gifts to glorify god, it gives you hope for the future. and, tonight, as we come together, we are going to talk about some serious subjects. you're going to meet some people who have experienced things that our forefathers would have never believed could have happened. you are going to hear stories that i think will cause your heart to perhaps skip a beat when you realize this is actually happening in the united states of america. and yet, we still have the freedom to come together and in jesus name, gather like they just did, sing patriotic songs and to also elevate the name of their lord and savior. ultimately, that is why we're doing what we're doing. not just tonight. but why we have been engaged in this discussion about religious liberties for a long, long time and you're going to hear from folks who had a point in time where there conviction came in conflict with their government. this is something that is a ongoing, longstanding components of who they are. it's not the point in history or point in time when you're confronted to make a decision, will i stand on my principles or follow them. it's not that point in time where you make that decision. it's every day that leads up to that experience and it's your consistent walk and your consistent practice and the education that you've likely had from your parents, your grandparents and that sort of thing that creates the character that causes you, when you become confronted with that situation to say, i cannot. i cannot violate what god's called me to do. and so tonight, as we -- as we hear these people's stories, as we share in their experience, i want to make sure that you don't miss the point. and the point of a lot of what you're going to see tonight is that their story is your story. the only difference is, perhaps it hasn't happened to you yet. but when you hear these stories and as you think about what would i do in that situation, internalize that very question because you are likely to be faced with that situation. in fact, i would venture to guess that many of you have, in one way or another, maybe it's the sensitivity training your work requires you to go through, you think if i'm quiet enough and get through this, i can get back to work and do what i need to do. maybe it's somebody who comes and goes from a civic club or a social environment where they're vocal about their beliefs and you have to decide, will i tell the truth or be quiet or step back and let the opportunity to go? i want you to understand that their story is your story. this is not a time to gather thousands of people together to come in and just observe to be entertained or to be here to just lift them up and we want to lift you up tonight. we want to acknowledge that the sacrifices you have made, as you tell your stories, are very real and inspiring to us. when we leave tonight, we heard stories from people we admire, we missed what was going on here. their story is your story. their story and your story is important. in part, because in america, we ought to be able to own and conduct business in accordance with our faith. we ought to be able to hold a public job and conduct ourselves in accordance with our faith. we ought to be able to provide a service in accordance with our faith and the reason that it's important that you and i stand together with these folks and folks like them all over the country is not just because their livelihood is being threatened, but at the base of that is that each one of us is called to share our faith with others. when confronted with those situations, whether it's somebody that walks into your shop or the encounter you have at your place of business or the company you work with, each of those is an opportunity for you to not just say, this is what i believe, based on god's word, but the -- that conversation then opens the door for you to look that person in the eye and say you and i have a share d situation. we are both simple humans and both with nature and in need of a savior. in this country, we still have the ability to share our faith freely but it's being threatened. if it becomes criminal, which it has, in these folks case, if it becomes criminal to say, i care enough about you that i want to live out my faith in a way that would help you understand that there's sin in your life, i mean, i presume there are many believers in the audience tonight. [applause] you would not be there, in that place. you would not be in that relationship with your god if you hadn't come to a position where you understood that you were lost. that you were lost in your sin. eternity is a long time and hell is a hot place and you don't want to go there and someone cared about you enough to share the love of jesus christ and said there is a savior that cared enough about you that god sent his son to take your sin on himself, to die in your place and to demonstrate his power or sin and death by rising again. if it had been illegal for somebody to say that, how much smaller might our numbers be? the reason that we still live in a country that is blessed in the ways -- in the many ways that we are, i believe, is because our founders, in and amongst all the rights that they itemized in our constitution, in the principles that are outlined in all of our earlier findings and documents and writings, they came from what those founding fathers learned from their preachers. in fact, many of them were preachers so if we look at the family or the many young people and we think we want for them a brighter future than what we had, just like our parents wanted a brighter future for us than they had, the key, the pin, the focal point for being able to do that, throughout our history as a country, has been preserving our religious liberty. keep in mind, if for some reason, a government or a court can take away our religious liberties and our first amendment rights, what's to stop them from taking the second amendment or any other right? our rights come from god, not from the government. tonight, you're going to meet some great patriots. you're going to meet some folks who are examples of average, every day ordinary people who certainly wouldn't imagine they would be sitting here, telling you their story and yet when the time for choosing came, they chose their lord and savior over compliance with the court or government. [applause] my hope is, that as we go through this evening and when we come to the conclusion of this evening, that you have identified enough with their stories that in your heart and in your mind, you're prepared to say, when it comes my turn, i'm going to stand with them and i'm going to stand with my god, no matter what the government says. [applause] as we get started tonight, we want to invite a local pastor to come and lead us in prayer. mike is a pastor who's become a good friend of mine over the years. he pastors a smaller church, they have an influence that is far larger in this community than their numbers would imply. pastor mike is unafraid and is bold and he knows what he's called to do and he goes and does it. and let's the world see him live out his faith. i'm going to invite him to come and tell a little bit of his story and share an experience he had, as he preached on the subject that is kind of at the center of this evening and to lead us in prayer. pastor mike, if you would, please. [applause] >> it warms my heart to see all of you hear tonight. i am really honored to be apart of this experience and to say that i, early on, was be able to say, mr. cruz, i'm with you all the way.
in his ability to articulate conservative principles and he'll fight for what we believe in. i'm honored to be able to be here with you. but what i know is, there's coming a day when a pastor, standing behind here, preaching the whole council of the word of god is going to be seen and deemed as a threat and i pray that every pastor continues to preach god's word, unfiltered, as courageously as they can because that is the only thing that will turn this country around again.  i'm going to ask you, if you're physically able, as we address a righteous and holy god. we thank you so much for who you are. the blessings that you have given to this great nation we are apart of. you have said that blessed is the nation whose god is the lord and we have turned our back on you. forgive us, god. repent. there are people here, thousands across our land that say, we want our country back. and so, god, we just cry out to you and say, lord, help us stand firm in the torrent that is before us. and i thank you, god, for the people that will be here, the examples that we see of courage and conviction in a culture that is so compromised. help us, god, to never turn our backs on jesus. help us to always stand for truth. we pray this prayer in the name of jesus christ, our lord, amen. [applause] i was thinking, as we were getting ready for this event, my kids, and the sort of world we're going to leave to them. the sorts of discussions we've had around the dinner table, a generation ago, you would never imagine. not just explaining the biblical truth i want my son's to go by, but the society we are currently living in and explaining to them, this is god's truth and when you say this publicly, you are likely to come under persecution or pressure. what pastor mike didn't say and i'll tell you for him, he put up a title of a message of his markee that dealt with sin and the folks that were convicted by that sign vandalized the sign, threatened him and his family. called the news. amazing, a pastor's preaching on sin. the news people thought it was newsworthy. i thought that was kind of interesting, too. mike saw just a little glim s of what they have been through. how amazing that we come to a point where i have to have these discussions with my kids. then it caused me to think about my parents, my grandparents, my great grandparents. is there anybody else in here who's a granddaughter or grandson for the revolution? your family was a part of the revolution? i'm seeing hands. how about folks who either fought in or parents or grandparents fought in world war ii or world war ii. how many people have family members who have been deployed or who are currently deployed. don't squander the sacrifices that have been made by our forefathers. [applause] tonight, i have the honor and privilege of introducing a friend of mine. i've spent many, many miles sitting next to him in a car, looking through the windshield and discussing any number of things. all sorts of topics, both philosophical, religious and of course, political, came up in the discussions. i learned to admire his philosophical perspective and his way of decompressing and boiling it down to not just the current days state of affairs, but to relating it to our history as individual or as a country. and so tonight, as we begin to lay the foundation upon which we're going to have this discussion with our special guest. i'd like to invite to the stage and introduce a good friend of mine, congressman steve king. [applause] congressman king: thank you very, very much. it is an honor to be in this building, in this room among all of you. you treat me that well when i step out here. i'm very grateful to have the privilege to say some things. i want to compress it into a way that adds meaning to the balance of what we're hear tonight and religious freedom and the victims of the persecution. what we need to understand about this great country we are, i profoundly believe that god shaped this nation with his hand. [applause] that he sent the pilgrims and the other settlers over here to this continent and moved our founder fathers around like a chessboard to shape this great nation. i would take you back to mosaic law. god sent moses up the mount to come down with a tablet, mosaic law. many centuries later, i would find myself wanting to hear the arguments before the supreme court to set the tablets up in places like texas, that was the month of june. but it was a bright day. in 2005, i went to the supreme court building, i had a permission slip from the justices to hear their oral arguments. the crowd was so thick, i had to climb through the hedge. i climbed through the hedge. i go up to the door of the supreme court, my pupils are shrunken down as they are. opened the door into the darkness, there stood a white shirt and i said, i'm congressman steve king to hear the supreme court. the man said, in a deep voice, i'm moses and i'm hear to lead you. [laughter] no kidding. no kidding. moses led me in and moses lead me out. up in front of that courtroom was going to be the general of the state of texas.  that was ten years ago. the attorney general is now the governor of the state of texas. [applause] and and, i'm tempted to say the lord works in mysterious ways, but i don't think it's that mysterious, i think it's obvious. i remember a state senator saying to me, why do you think america is god-shaped by the hand of god? i believe it was his divine guidance. he said it was an accident of history. could have happened in some other planet some other place in the universe. no, i can't accept that. mosaic law went to greeks. it came from moses. roman law is what jesus did. he had a right to face his accusers and he was innocent until proven guilty. remember when the high priest said did you really preach those things? did you preach those things? he said, ask them, they were there. the guard struck jesus. the answer was, he had a right to face his accusers. he said, if i have spoken wrongly, you must do it. innocent until proven guilty. it was spread all across western europe. it gave us redemption and all the things that came from jesus flows out of us today. it was with roman law and went into the dark ages and forgot how to think and brought it back because the bible was protected and preserved and they had to relearn how to think. there was the foundation of free enterprise capitalism that was published in 1776 that came over here to this country and we had puritans and a concept of manifest. at the dawn of the industrial revolution and we did so in the blink of a historical eye and became the greatest nation in the world. how can anybody think that that's not the hand of god? [applause] and, did they understand that, then? our founding fathers did, we hold thee truths to be self-evident that all men are treated equal. but, 1865, february 12, the war wasn't over. it was lincoln's last birthday, on sunday. the first black person allowed to speak in the united states capital building when members of congress believed that lincoln just freed the slaves before that and they believed they should have a sermon and religious sermon there. i've taken some excerpts from it. it takes about 40 seconds. a former slave, then pastor of the presbyterian church, with his background, he understood and he spoke to the members of congress. he's speaking of the founding fathers. they have received from the court of heaven the magna carta of human rights that was handed down through the clouds in and amid the lights and given by the son of god on the mounts of the attitudes while the glory shown around them. from the declaration of independence, they have a guarantee of political. freedom to worship god. i recommend that you google that and read that speech. put yourself in a mindset of that place and that time, lincoln's last birthday, near the end of the civil war and the rights coming from god and think, do our children know this? will our grandchildren know this? we must understand the principle that rights come from god. if they come from government, government can take them away. they're unalienable. step up and defend your rights that come from god, that are enshrined in the constitution. be not afraid. be bold, be noble, preach the word. if they take away your 501 not-for-profit status, is anyone in this for profit anyway? if you need help, call me. i'll pray for you. i know you're there and you're bold. we've got to be confident and i recall a time i was giving a speech out on the courthouse and an individual came out and he said, you can't speak here. this is election year and we have elections here. he said, if you can't exercise your right here on the courthouse lawn, where in the world can you? i'm glad we're standing here today and we're going to hear these stories and narratives and we have a leader who has stepped up for our religious freedom. over and over again, the boy scout, that all came from ted cruz. he's brought us here together to night to pray and learn and to be energized. if we don't use our constitutional rights, we will lose them. i will introduce, there will be a video that follows me. it is from the liberty institute, one of the top constitutional lawyers in our country. he's going to talk to you about religious liberty and defending religious liberty. >> i've been doing religious liberty cases for over 26 years. i have to be honest with you, in the quarter-century, i've never seen what i see now. over 1,600 published attacks, not including the ones that aren't published is an example of what's happening each year. they are doubling from one year to the next. cases are a little 5-year-old girl praying over her meal and ordered to stop and told, quote, it is not good to pray at school. senior citizens were threatened to have their meals taken away. they said it would violate sepragdz -- separation of church and state. it is from people who are young, older. the attacks are pervasive. tonight, alone, you will hear from pastors who have been fined and had their chapel closed because they wouldn't engage in violation of their faith. you'll hear from a couple who had their business destroyed and a $250,000 fine assessed against them because they would not participate in a wedding that would violate their faith. you'll hear from a 72-year-old who might lose their home. you'll hear from an air force veteran and hero who gave his all for 19 years and only to be attacked for his faith, relieved of his duties. the stories you will hear are from ordinary citizens and they're a wake up call to a nation. our founders called religious freedom our first freedom. they do so not because it's in the first two clauses of the first amendment because they knew if you lose your religious freedom, you'll lose all your freedom. there is no better person to do this than ted cruz. not because his father is a pastor. many know of his brilliance and his constitutional expertise. something few know, he was giving time for religious freedom and donated hundreds of thousands of dollars of time for religious liberty cases. it was a great sacrifice in time and money because it is a priority and a commitment. when the mojave cross was attacked, he donated his time to stand with me and with liberty institute in representing millions of veterans, the vfw, the purple heart, and america ex-prisoners of war. this 70-year-old memorial, was ordered to be torn down by the lower courts and to be covered while the case went on appeal. the cross was covered with a bag and then a chain was wrapped around the bottom with a padlock. as the u.s. u.s. supreme court, the bag is off, the chain is off. ted gave his talent, free of charge, to millions. if anyone has the background, the commitment and the understanding to cover this issue, it is ted cruz. i am very thankful for him, as a friends, a constitutional lawyer and as a leader, protecting our first freedom. god bless you, ted cruz, and thank you for hosting this very important rally. >> ladies and gentlemen, please welcome back to the stage, brian english. [applause] mr. english: one of the things that ted cruz can put together an interesting group of teens. i want to introduce another patriot, somebody who many of you know and after you've heard him speak here, you're all going to love him. i'd like to introduce to you the state chairman for our campaign, former secretary of state, matt schultz. [applause] mr. schultz: it's an honor to be here with you tonight. it's a bigger honor to serve as ted cruz state chair. i love this man, let me tell you why. because he's honest. he's honest and he stands up and he fights for what he believes in and what we believe in. we're at a cross road in our country. we see the erosion of our families. our constitution's being shredded, they care more about about cecil the lion than they do about the unborn.  i'm married and i have five kids and i am deeply concerned about where our country's going. we need a champion, a courageous conservative, someone who's going to stand up and fight for us. you know, i think about our savior, when we went to the temple and saw the money-changers, what did we do? he threw them out. we need someone who is going to go to washington and throw the money changers out and stop the washington cartel.  when you read the scriptures, when you look at our country's history, you can see that god prepares and raises special men and women to protect and fight for his people. and i believe this is one of those moments in time. frz ted cruz is that man who god has prepared for this moment in time, to be our champion, to fight for our husbands, our wives, our children and our grandchildren, for our country. ted cruz will restore our constitution. he will restore our belief in america. that's why i'm supporting ted cruz and that's why i'm asking each and every one of you to stand with me in supporting my friend, our special person, texas senator, ted cruz, let's give him a warm welcome.   >> show us those signs, everybody. let's see those signs. show your support.mr. cruz: thank you.  god bless the great state of iowa.   you know the word tells us, where two or more are gathered in his name, he will be with us. what an incredible gathering this is, from across this state, how honored and humbled i am to be standing with so many patriots here in this room and with so many heroes who have gathered to tell us their tale of courage. you know, this nation, this nation we love is unique in the annals of the history of the word. we are a nation that was founded by men and women fleeing religious oppression. fleeing kings and monarchs who would opress them, who would tell them who you may worship and who you may not. and men and women fled from all over the world to come to the new world. to seek out a land where every one of us could worship the god, almighty, with our minds and souls, free of the government getting in the way. our nation was founded with the bloody revolution. a bloody revolution that under ordinary reason, had no business succeeding. a hapless group of colonists declared war on the mightest army on the planet and yet with god's providential blessing, america prevailed.  but there was a second revolution, a revolution more important than the revolution fought with guns and bayents. it was the revolution of ideas. for millennia, man had been told that our rights come from kings and queens. handed down like crumbs. by the monarch to be taken away by the win of the monarch. our country began with a fundamentally different proposition, that it does not come from government but from almighty god.  as the declaration put it so powerfully, we hold these truths to be held self-evident that all men are created equal. not by a king, queen, president. they are endowed by their creator.  with certain unalienable rights, life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. with those words, this nation sprung into existence. there is a reason why, in the constitution in the bill of rights, the very first protection in the very first amendment in the bill of rights is the freedom of religion. if we cannot worship god, if we cannot live according to our faith, all other liberties fade away. you know, steve talked about the ten commandments case in texas. it concerned a monument that had stood there since 1961. was erected, stood there for decades, disturbing nobody on the state capital grounds until an individual plaintiff, an atheist, a homeless man walked past the monument and decided it offended him and he filed a lawsuit seeking to tear down that monument. when that case when to the united states supreme court, when we argued that case, does anyone know how many times in the courtroom of the united states court, the image of the ten commandments appears? 43 times. that's very good. [laughter] [applause] 43 times, 40 times, the ten commandments are on the brass gates on the side of the courtroom. when you walk out the cort room, there are two wooden doors and there are two more images. you cannot walk out of the courtroom without seeing the ten commandments directly in front of you. when those justices heard the oral argument, right above their left shoulder was moses holding the 10 commandsuommandcommandments, looking down upon them. now, we won that case. [applause] but we won it 5-4. four justices were willing to order the state of texas to tear down that monument that has stood on the capital ground since 1961. we were one justice away. you want to know what this election is about, we're one justice away from the supreme court saying every statue be torn down. kelly talked about the mojave veterans memorial case, a cross seven feet tall. once again, a plaintiff came and sued. the plaintiff said there image of a cross cannot be seen on federal lands. here in iowa, there's litigation concerning exactly that today. i will say this, the plaintiffs were right on one thing, the cross has power.  i'll tell you, it was humbling, it was moving to represent veterans standing before the supreme court and we won that case, also.  but once again, it was 5-4. four justices were willing to say this monument to our veterans must be torn to the ground. anyone who's visited arlington cemetery and seen row after row with a cross of a star of daveid, honoring our soldiers who gave the last of the ultimate sacrifice, we're one justice away from the supreme court saying, we must tear those down. and you know, i have to say, these threats have been growing. they have been growing for decades, but never have the threats have been greater to religious liberty than they are right now and here today. . you know, many in the media say these threats don't exist. they're not real. well, the purpose of this gathering is to put a name and a face to these heroes. the purpose of this evening is to tell their stories. you know, there's a reason jesus spoke in parables. because that's how we understand, that's what touches our heart, that's what moves us. so it is my hope that all of us gathered here today, all of the home parties, all of the churches that are watching online, believers across this country will come to know and love these ordinary men and women who were living their lives. they didn't ask for conflict. they didn't ask for confrontation and the government came after them and said choose your faith or obedience to power and they said, i follow a higher power and that is god almighty.  and so, in telling these stories, i want to start with one that many of you know already. residents of iowa, iowa's own dick and betty. [applause] from iowa, they are an incredible couple. a couple i've gotten to know quite well. i want to start simply by playing a video and then we're going to invite, at the same time, dick and betty to the stage and have a conversation. let's start the video. >> i'm here with dick and betty and we're talking about their incredible journey.they inspire me and i am thrilled to have the chance to share their story. so, tell us about this church? when did you open it up to hosting weddings? >>... and then in 2009, the iowa law changed to include same-sex weddings.so then, in august of 2013, two gentlemen came in and dick had to deliver the bad news. they left, we didn't know. the very next day, it was on a sunday, we got the news that they were going to probably sue. >> i guess they filed a complaints the day after? >> yes. >> of course, it went viral. >> it was devastating to hear that we were bigots, we were homophobes. >> your wedding was contrary to your -- >> i was thinking, they don't know us. how could they be calling us all these horrible, horrible we have no hatred toward gay people. >> you have been, for a number of years, hosting weddings in this historic church.as a result of this litigation, you stopped weddings. >> we didn't have a church. >> that has been quite painful. as a result of that, the business has declined and we can't support it so we're -- by the end of august, we'll be shutting our doors. >> and you can understand. >> i'll tell you, our country was founded by people who risked everything for religious liberty, free of the government getting in the way and i want to thank both of you, number one, for taking a stand.but number two, for telling your story. your story is powerful, your story's inspirational and inspires me. >> what we hope we can do is try to change the course as best we can in the years we have left. >> well, thank you for your courage. betty, dick, thank you for the courage of your convictions. thank you for telling your story. let me ask you, why did you first begin hosting weddings in the church that to two of you own? >> we love weddings. we love that business. love to do the flowers and we had a restaurant and we had everything all in one location. how we live our life. >> when you first found out you were being sued, how did that impact the two of you? >> well, the whole event was devastating. i knew that it would never be the same. and -- mr. cruz: let me ask you what a cynic, what a skeptical person might say.which is, why didn't you just give in? what didn't you just agree to allow the same-sex wedding to be celebrating? >> we could not celebrate a sin. we could not take part in what we believe is a sin.  i suppose the media would say it's an easy thing to roll over and accept it and embrace it and say it's right. yet, your faith wouldn't allow you to do that betty: of course not. : litigation went on for 18 months. and then you personally paid $5,000,
