wow. whoa. that is some group of people. thousands.

so nice, thank you very much. that's really nice. thank you. it's great to be at trump tower. it's great to be in a wonderful city, new york. and it's an honor to have everybody here. this is beyond anybody's expectations. there's been no crowd like this.

and, i can tell you, some of the candidates, they went in. they didn't know the air-conditioner didn't work. they sweated like dogs.

they didn't know the room was too big, because they didn't have anybody there. how are they going to beat isis? i don't think it's gonna happen.

our country is in serious trouble. we don't have victories anymore. we used to have victories, but we don't have them. when was the last time anybody saw us beating, let's say, china in a trade deal? they kill us. i beat china all the time. all the time.

audience member: we want trump. we want trump.

trump: when did we beat japan at anything? they send their cars over by the millions, and what do we do? when was the last time you saw a chevrolet in tokyo? it doesn't exist, folks. they beat us all the time.

when do we beat mexico at the border? they're laughing at us, at our stupidity. and now they are beating us economically. they are not our friend, believe me. but they're killing us economically.

the u.s. has become a dumping ground for everybody else's problems.

thank you. it's true, and these are the best and the finest. when mexico sends its people, they're not sending their best. they're not sending you. they're not sending you. they're sending people that have lots of problems, and they're bringing those problems with us. they're bringing drugs. they're bringing crime. they're rapists. and some, i assume, are good people.

but i speak to border guards and they tell us what we're getting. and it only makes common sense. it only makes common sense. they're sending us not the right people.

it's coming from more than mexico. it's coming from all over south and latin america, and it's coming probably — probably — from the middle east. but we don't know. because we have no protection and we have no competence, we don't know what's happening. and it's got to stop and it's got to stop fast.

trump: islamic terrorism is eating up large portions of the middle east. they've become rich. i'm in competition with them.

they just built a hotel in syria. can you believe this? they built a hotel. when i have to build a hotel, i pay interest. they don't have to pay interest, because they took the oil that, when we left iraq, i said we should've taken.

so now isis has the oil, and what they don't have, iran has. and in 19 — and i will tell you this, and i said it very strongly, years ago, i said — and i love the military, and i want to have the strongest military that we've ever had, and we need it more now than ever. but i said, "don't hit iraq," because you're going to totally destabilize the middle east. iran is going to take over the middle east, iran and somebody else will get the oil, and it turned out that iran is now taking over iraq. think of it. iran is taking over iraq, and they're taking it over big league.

we spent $2 trillion in iraq, $2 trillion. we lost thousands of lives, thousands in iraq. we have wounded soldiers, who i love, i love — they're great — all over the place, thousands and thousands of wounded soldiers.

and we have nothing. we can't even go there. we have nothing. and every time we give iraq equipment, the first time a bullet goes off in the air, they leave it.

last week, i read 2,300 humvees — these are big vehicles — were left behind for the enemy. 2,000? you would say maybe two, maybe four? 2,300 sophisticated vehicles, they ran, and the enemy took them.

audience member: we need trump now.

trump: you're right.

audience member: we need trump now.

trump: last quarter, it was just announced our gross domestic product — a sign of strength, right? but not for us. it was below zero. whoever heard of this? it's never below zero.

our labor participation rate was the worst since 1978. but think of it, gdp below zero, horrible labor participation rate.

and our real unemployment is anywhere from 18 to 20 percent. don't believe the 5.6. don't believe it.

that's right. a lot of people up there can't get jobs. they can't get jobs, because there are no jobs, because china has our jobs and mexico has our jobs. they all have jobs.

but the real number, the real number is anywhere from 18 to 19 and maybe even 21 percent, and nobody talks about it, because it's a statistic that's full of nonsense.

audience member: we want trump now.

trump: our enemies are getting stronger and stronger by the way, and we as a country are getting weaker. even our nuclear arsenal doesn't work.

it came out recently they have equipment that is 30 years old. they don't know if it worked. and i thought it was horrible when it was broadcast on television, because boy, does that send signals to putin and all of the other people that look at us and they say, "that is a group of people, and that is a nation that truly has no clue. they don't know what they're doing. they don't know what they're doing."

audience member: we need trump now.

trump: we have a disaster called the big lie: obamacare. obamacare.

yesterday, it came out that costs are going for people up 29, 39, 49, and even 55 percent, and deductibles are through the roof. you have to be hit by a tractor, literally, a tractor, to use it, because the deductibles are so high, it's virtually useless. it's virtually useless. it is a disaster.

trump: and remember the $5 billion web site? $5 billion we spent on a web site, and to this day it doesn't work. a $5 billion web site.

i have so many web sites, i have them all over the place. i hire people, they do a web site. it costs me $3. $5 billion web site.

audience: we want trump. we want trump. we want trump. we want trump.

trump: well, you need somebody, because politicians are all talk, no action. nothing's gonna get done. they will not bring us — believe me — to the promised land. they will not.

as an example, i've been on the circuit making speeches, and i hear my fellow republicans. and they're wonderful people. i like them. they all want me to support them. they don't know how to bring it about. they come up to my office. i'm meeting with three of them in the next week. and they don't know — "are you running? are you not running? could we have your support? what do we do? how do we do it?"

i like them. and i hear their speeches. and they don't talk jobs and they don't talk china. when was the last time you heard china is killing us? they're devaluing their currency to a level that you wouldn't believe. it makes it impossible for our companies to compete, impossible. they're killing us.

but you don't hear that from anybody else. you don't hear it from anybody else. and i watch the speeches.

audience member: no more free .

trump: thank you.

i watch the speeches of these people, and they say the sun will rise, the moon will set, all sorts of wonderful things will happen. and people are saying, "what's going on? i just want a job. just get me a job. i don't need the rhetoric. i want a job."

and that's what's happening. and it's going to get worse, because remember, obamacare really kicks in in '16, 2016. obama is going to be out playing golf. he might be on one of my courses. i would invite him, i actually would say. i have the best courses in the world, so i'd say, you what, if he wants to — i have one right next to the white house, right on the potomac. if he'd like to play, that's fine.

in fact, i'd love him to leave early and play, that would be a very good thing.

but obamacare kicks in in 2016. really big league. it is going to be amazingly destructive. doctors are quitting. i have a friend who's a doctor, and he said to me the other day, "donald, i never saw anything like it. i have more accountants than i have nurses. it's a disaster. my patients are beside themselves. they had a plan that was good. they have no plan now."

we have to repeal obamacare, and it can be — and — and it can be replaced with something much better for everybody. let it be for everybody. but much better and much less expensive for people and for the government. and we can do it.

audience: trump. trump. trump. trump. trump. trump.

trump: so i've watched the politicians. i've dealt with them all my life. if you can't make a good deal with a politician, then there's something wrong with you. you're certainly not very good. and that's what we have representing us. they will never make america great again. they don't even have a chance. they're controlled fully — they're controlled fully by the lobbyists, by the donors, and by the special interests, fully.

yes, they control them. hey, i have lobbyists. i have to tell you. i have lobbyists that can produce anything for me. they're great. but you know what? it won't happen. it won't happen. because we have to stop doing things for some people, but for this country, it's destroying our country. we have to stop, and it has to stop now.

audience: it needs trump.

trump: now, our country needs — our country needs a truly great leader, and we need a truly great leader now. we need a leader that wrote "the art of the deal."

audience member: yes.

trump: we need a leader that can bring back our jobs, can bring back our manufacturing, can bring back our military, can take care of our vets. our vets have been abandoned.

and we also need a cheerleader.

you know, when president obama was elected, i said, "well, the one thing, i think he'll do well. i think he'll be a great cheerleader for the country. i think he'd be a great spirit."

he was vibrant. he was young. i really thought that he would be a great cheerleader.

audience member: but not a leader.

trump: he's not a leader. that's true. you're right about that.

but he wasn't a cheerleader. he's actually a negative force. he's been a negative force. he wasn't a cheerleader; he was the opposite.

we need somebody that can take the brand of the united states and make it great again. it's not great again.

we need — we need somebody — we need somebody that literally will take this country and make it great again. we can do that.

and, i will tell you, i love my life. i have a wonderful family. they're saying, "dad, you're going to do something that's going to be so tough."

you know, all of my life, i've heard that a truly successful person, a really, really successful person and even modestly successful cannot run for public office. just can't happen. and yet that's the kind of mindset that you need to make this country great again.

so ladies and gentlemen...

i am officially running...... for president of the united states, and we are going to make our country great again.

it can happen. our country has tremendous potential. we have tremendous people.

we have people that aren't working. we have people that have no incentive to work. but they're going to have incentive to work, because the greatest social program is a job. and they'll be proud, and they'll love it, and they'll make much more than they would've ever made, and they'll be — they'll be doing so well, and we're going to be thriving as a country, thriving. it can happen.

i will be the greatest jobs president that god ever created. i tell you that.

i'll bring back our jobs from china, from mexico, from japan, from so many places. i'll bring back our jobs, and i'll bring back our money.

right now, think of this: we owe china $1.3 trillion. we owe japan more than that. so they come in, they take our jobs, they take our money, and then they loan us back the money, and we pay them in interest, and then the dollar goes up so their deal's even better.

how stupid are our leaders? how stupid are these politicians to allow this to happen? how stupid are they?

i'm going to tell you — thank you. i'm going to tell you a couple of stories about trade, because i'm totally against the trade bill for a number of reasons.

number one, the people negotiating don't have a clue. our president doesn't have a clue. he's a bad negotiator.

he's the one that did bergdahl. we get bergdahl, they get five killer terrorists that everybody wanted over there.

we get bergdahl. we get a traitor. we get a no-good traitor, and they get the five people that they wanted for years, and those people are now back on the battlefield trying to kill us. that's the negotiator we have.

take a look at the deal he's making with iran. he makes that deal, israel maybe won't exist very long. it's a disaster, and we have to protect israel. but...

audience member: yes, we do. yes, we do.

trump: so we need people — i'm a free trader. but the problem with free trade is you need really talented people to negotiate for you. if you don't have talented people, if you don't have great leadership, if you don't have people that know business, not just a political hack that got the job because he made a contribution to a campaign, which is the way all jobs, just about, are gotten, free trade terrible.

free trade can be wonderful if you have smart people, but we have people that are stupid. we have people that aren't smart. and we have people that are controlled by special interests. and it's just not going to work.

so, here's a couple of stories happened recently. a friend of mine is a great manufacturer. and, you know, china comes over and they dump all their stuff, and i buy it. i buy it, because, frankly, i have an obligation to buy it, because they devalue their currency so brilliantly, they just did it recently, and nobody thought they could do it again.

but with all our problems with russia, with all our problems with everything — everything, they got away with it again. and it's impossible for our people here to compete.

so i want to tell you this story. a friend of mine who's a great manufacturer, calls me up a few weeks ago. he's very upset. i said, "what's your problem?"

he said, "you know, i make great product."

and i said, "i know. i know that because i buy the product."

he said, "i can't get it into china. they won't accept it. i sent a boat over and they actually sent it back. they talked about environmental, they talked about all sorts of crap that had nothing to do with it."

i said, "oh, wait a minute, that's terrible. does anyone know this?"

he said, "yeah, they do it all the time with other people."

i said, "they send it back?"

"yeah. so i finally got it over there and they charged me a big tariff. they're not supposed to be doing that. i told them."

now, they do charge you tariff on trucks, when we send trucks and other things over there.

ask boeing. they wanted boeing's secrets. they wanted their patents and all their secrets before they agreed to buy planes from boeing.

hey, i'm not saying they're stupid. i like china. i sell apartments for — i just sold an apartment for $15 million to somebody from china. am i supposed to dislike them? i own a big chunk of the bank of america building at 1290 avenue of the americas, that i got from china in a war. very valuable.

i love china. the biggest bank in the world is from china. you know where their united states headquarters is located? in this building, in trump tower. i love china. people say, "oh, you don't like china?"

no, i love them. but their leaders are much smarter than our leaders, and we can't sustain ourself with that. there's too much — it's like — it's like take the new england goods and tom brady and have them play your high school football team. that's the difference between china's leaders and our leaders.

they are ripping us. we are rebuilding china. we're rebuilding many countries. china, you go there now, roads, bridges, schools, you never saw anything like it. they have bridges that make the george washington bridge look like small potatoes. and they're all over the place.

we have all the cards, but we don't know how to use them. we don't even know that we have the cards, because our leaders don't understand the game. we could turn off that spigot by charging them tax until they behave properly.

now they're going militarily. they're building a military island in the middle of the south china sea. a military island. now, our country could never do that because we'd have to get environmental clearance, and the environmentalist wouldn't let our country — we would never build in an ocean. they built it in about one year, this massive military port.

they're building up their military to a point that is very scary. you have a problem with isis. you have a bigger problem with china.

and, in my opinion, the new china, believe it or not, in terms of trade, is mexico.

so this man tells me about the manufacturing. i say, "that's a terrible story. i hate to hear it."

but i have another one, ford.

so mexico takes a company, a car company that was going to build in tennessee, rips it out. everybody thought the deal was dead. reported it in the wall street journal recently. everybody thought it was a done deal. it's going in and that's going to be it, going into tennessee. great state, great people.

all of a sudden, at the last moment, this big car manufacturer, foreign, announces they're not going to tennessee. they're gonna spend their $1 billion in mexico instead. not good.

now, ford announces a few weeks ago that ford is going to build a $2.5 billion car and truck and parts manufacturing plant in mexico. $2.5 billion, it's going to be one of the largest in the world. ford. good company.

so i announced that i'm running for president. i would...

... one of the early things i would do, probably before i even got in — and i wouldn't even use — you know, i have — i know the smartest negotiators in the world. i know the good ones. i know the bad ones. i know the overrated ones.

you get a lot of them that are overrated. they're not good. they think they are. they get good stories, because the newspapers get buffaloed (ph). but they're not good.

but i know the negotiators in the world, and i put them one for each country. believe me, folks. we will do very, very well, very, very well.

but i wouldn't even waste my time with this one. i would call up the head of ford, who i know. if i was president, i'd say, "congratulations. i understand that you're building a nice $2.5 billion car factory in mexico and that you're going to take your cars and sell them to the united states zero tax, just flow them across the border."

and you say to yourself, "how does that help us," right? "how does that help us? where is that good"? it's not.

so i would say, "congratulations. that's the good news. let me give you the bad news. every car and every truck and every part manufactured in this plant that comes across the border, we're going to charge you a 35-percent tax, and that tax is going to be paid simultaneously with the transaction, and that's it.

now, here's what is going to happen. if it's not me in the position, it's one of these politicians that we're running against, you know, the 400 people that we're . and here's what's going to happen. they're not so stupid. they know it's not a good thing, and they may even be upset by it. but then they're going to get a call from the donors or probably from the lobbyist for ford and say, "you can't do that to ford, because ford takes care of me and i take care of you, and you can't do that to ford."

and guess what? no problem. they're going to build in mexico. they're going to take away thousands of jobs. it's very bad for us.

so under president trump, here's what would happen:

the head of ford will call me back, i would say within an hour after i told them the bad news. but it could be he'd want to be cool, and he'll wait until the next day. you know, they want to be a little cool.

and he'll say, "please, please, please." he'll beg for a little while, and i'll say, "no interest." then he'll call all sorts of political people, and i'll say, "sorry, fellas. no interest," because i don't need anybody's money. it's nice. i don't need anybody's money.

i'm using my own money. i'm not using the lobbyists. i'm not using donors. i don't care. i'm really rich. i ...

and by the way, i'm not even saying that in a — that's the kind of mindset, that's the kind of thinking you need for this country.

audience member: absolutely.

trump: so — because we got to make the country rich.

it sounds crass. somebody said, "oh, that's crass." it's not crass.

we got $18 trillion in debt. we got nothing but problems.

we got a military that needs equipment all over the place. we got nuclear weapons that are obsolete.

we've got nothing. we've got social security that's going to be destroyed if somebody like me doesn't bring money into the country. all these other people want to cut the hell out of it. i'm not going to cut it at all; i'm going to bring money in, and we're going to save it.

but here's what's going to happen:

after i'm called by 30 friends of mine who contributed to different campaigns, after i'm called by all of the special interests and by the — the donors and by the lobbyists — and they have zero chance at convincing me, zero — i'll get a call the next day from the head of ford. he'll say. "please reconsider," i'll say no.

he'll say, "mr. president, we've decided to move the plant back to the united states, and we're not going to build it in mexico." that's it. they have no choice. they have no choice.

there are hundreds of things like that. i'll give you another example.

trump: saudi arabia, they make $1 billion a day. $1 billion a day. i love the saudis. many are in this building. they make a billion dollars a day. whenever they have problems, we send over the ships. we say "we're gonna protect." what are we doing? they've got nothing but money.

if the right person asked them, they'd pay a fortune. they wouldn't be there except for us.

and believe me, you look at the border with yemen. you remember obama a year ago, yemen was a great victory. two weeks later, the place was blown up. everybody got out — and they kept our equipment.

they always keep our equipment. we ought to send used equipment, right? they always keep our equipment. we ought to send some real junk, because, frankly, it would be — we ought to send our surplus. we're always losing this gorgeous brand-new stuff.

but look at that border with saudi arabia. do you really think that these people are interested in yemen? saudi arabia without us is gone. they're gone.

and i'm the one that made all of the right predictions about iraq. you know, all of these politicians that i'm running against now — it's so nice to say i'm running as opposed to if i run, if i run. i'm running.

but all of these politicians that i'm running against now, they're trying to disassociate. i mean, you looked at bush, it took him five days to answer the question on iraq. he couldn't answer the question. he didn't know. i said, "is he intelligent?"

then i looked at rubio. he was unable to answer the question, is iraq a good thing or bad thing? he didn't know. he couldn't answer the question.

how are these people gonna lead us? how are we gonna — how are we gonna go back and make it great again? we can't. they don't have a clue. they can't lead us. they can't. they can't even answer simple questions. it was terrible.

but saudi arabia is in big, big trouble. now, thanks to fracking and other things, the oil is all over the place. and i used to say it, there are ships at sea, and this was during the worst crisis, that were loaded up with oil, and the cartel kept the price up, because, again, they were smarter than our leaders. they were smarter than our leaders.

there is so much wealth out there that can make our country so rich again, and therefore make it great again. because we need money. we're dying. we're dying. we need money. we have to do it. and we need the right people.

so ford will come back. they'll all come back. and i will say this, this is going to be an election, in my opinion, that's based on competence.

audience member: yes.

trump: somebody said — thank you, darlin'.

somebody said to me the other day, a reporter, a very nice reporter, "but, mr. trump, you're not a nice person."

audience member: we don't need nice.

trump: that's true. but actually i am. i think i am a nice person. people that know me, like me. does my family like me? i think so, right. look at my family. i'm proud of my family.

by the way, speaking of my family, melania, barron, kai, donnie, don, vanessa, tiffany, evanka did a great job. did she do a great job?

great. jared (ph), laura and eric, i'm very proud of my family. they're a great family.

so the reporter said to me the other day, "but, mr. trump, you're not a nice person. how can you get people to vote for you?"

i said, "i don't know." i said, "i think that number one, i am a nice person. i give a lot of money away to charities and other things. i think i'm actually a very nice person."

but, i said, "this is going to be an election that's based on competence, because people are tired of these nice people. and they're tired of being ripped off by everybody in the world. and they're tired of spending more money on education than any nation in the world per capita, than any nation in the world, and we are 26th in the world, 25 countries are better than us in education. and some of them are like third world countries. but we're becoming a third word country, because of our infrastructure, our airports, our roads, everything. so one of the things i did, and i said, you know what i'll do. i'll do it. because a lot of people said, "he'll never run. number one, he won't want to give up his lifestyle."

trump: they're right about that, but i'm doing it.

number two, i'm a private company, so nobody knows what i'm worth. and the one thing is that when you run, you have to announce and certify to all sorts of governmental authorities your net worth.

so i said, "that's ok." i'm proud of my net worth. i've done an amazing job.

i started off — thank you — i started off in a small office with my father in brooklyn and queens, and my father said — and i love my father. i learned so much. he was a great negotiator. i learned so much just sitting at his feet playing with blocks listening to him negotiate with subcontractors. but i learned a lot.

but he used to say, "donald, don't go into manhattan. that's the big leagues. we don't know anything about that. don't do it."

i said, "i gotta go into manhattan. i gotta build those big buildings. i gotta do it, dad. i've gotta do it."

and after four or five years in brooklyn, i ventured into manhattan and did a lot of great deals — the grand hyatt hotel. i was responsible for the convention center on the west side. i did a lot of great deals, and i did them early and young. and now i'm building all over the world, and i love what i'm doing.

but they all said, a lot of the pundits on television, "well, donald will never run, and one of the main reasons is he's private and he's probably not as successful as everybody thinks."

so i said to myself, you know, nobody's ever going to know unless i run, because i'm really proud of my success. i really am.

i've employed — i've employed tens of thousands of people over my lifetime. that means medical. that means education. that means everything.

so a large accounting firm and my accountants have been working for months, because it's big and complex, and they've put together a statement, a financial statement, just a summary. but everything will be filed eventually with the government, and we don't extensions or anything. we'll be filing it right on time. we don't need anything.

and it was even reported incorrectly yesterday, because they said, "he had assets of $9 billion." so i said (ph), "no, that's the wrong number. that's the wrong number. not assets."

so they put together this. and before i say it, i have to say this. i made it the old-fashioned way. it's real estate. you know, it's real estate.

it's labor, and it's unions good and some bad and lots of people that aren't in unions, and it's all over the place and building all over the world.

and i have assets — big accounting firm, one of the most highly respected — 9 billion 240 million dollars.

audience member: yeah.

trump: and i have liabilities of about $500 million (ph). that's long-term debt, very low interest rates.

in fact, one of the big banks came to me and said, "donald, you don't have enough borrowings. could we loan you $4 billion"? i said, "i don't need it. i don't want it. and i've been there. i don't want it."

but in two seconds, they give me whatever i wanted. so i have a total net worth, and now with the increase, it'll be well-over $10 billion. but here, a total net worth of — net worth, not assets, not — a net worth, after all debt, after all expenses, the greatest assets — trump tower, 1290 avenue of the americas, bank of america building in san francisco, 40 wall street, sometimes referred to as the trump building right opposite the new york — many other places all over the world.

so the total is $8,737,540,00.

now i'm not doing that...

i'm not doing that to brag, because you know what? i don't have to brag. i don't have to, believe it or not.

i'm doing that to say that that's the kind of thinking our country needs. we need that thinking. we have the opposite thinking.

we have losers. we have losers. we have people that don't have it. we have people that are morally corrupt. we have people that are selling this country down the drain.

so i put together this statement, and the only reason i'm telling you about it today is because we really do have to get going, because if we have another three or four years — you know, we're at $8 trillion now. we're soon going to be at $20 trillion.

according to the economists — who i'm not big believers in, but, nevertheless, this is what they're saying — that $24 trillion — we're very close — that's the point of no return. $24 trillion. we will be there soon. that's when we become greece. that's when we become a country that's unsalvageable. and we're gonna be there very soon. we're gonna be there very soon.

audience member: make america strong.

trump: so, just to sum up, i would do various things very quickly. i would repeal and replace the big lie, obamacare.

audience member: yeah.

i would build a great wall, and nobody builds walls better than me, believe me, and i'll build them very inexpensively, i will build a great, great wall on our southern border. and i will have mexico pay for that wall.

audience member: yes.

trump: mark my words.

nobody would be tougher on isis than . nobody.

i will find — within our military, i will find the general patton or i will find general macarthur, i will find the right guy. i will find the guy that's going to take that military and make it really work. nobody, nobody will be pushing us around.

audience member: yes.

trump: i will stop iran from getting nuclear weapons. and we won't be using a man like secretary kerry that has absolutely no concept of negotiation, who's making a horrible and laughable deal, who's just being tapped along as they make weapons right now, and then goes into a bicycle race at 72 years old, and falls and breaks his leg. i won't be doing that. and i promise i will never be in a bicycle race. that i can tell you.

i will immediately terminate president obama's illegal executive order on immigration, immediately.

fully support and back up the second amendment.

now, it's very interesting. today i heard it. through stupidity, in a very, very hard core prison, interestingly named clinton, two vicious murderers, two vicious people escaped, and nobody knows where they are. and a woman was on television this morning, and she said, "you know, mr. trump," and she was telling other people, and i actually called her, and she said, "you know, mr. trump, i always was against guns. i didn't want guns. and now since this happened" — it's up in the prison area — "my husband and i are finally in agreement, because he wanted the guns. we now have a gun on every table. we're ready to start shooting."

i said, "very interesting."

so protect the second amendment.

end — end common core. common core should — it is a disaster. bush is totally in favor of common core. i don't see how he can possibly get the nomination. he's weak on immigration. he's in favor of common core. how the hell can you vote for this guy? you just can't do it. we have to end — education has to be local.

rebuild the country's infrastructure.

audience member: yeah.

trump: nobody can do that like me. believe me. it will be done on time, on budget, way below cost, way below what anyone ever thought.

i look at the roads being built all over the country, and i say i can build those things for one-third. what they do is unbelievable, how bad.

you know, we're building on pennsylvania avenue, the old post office, we're converting it into one of the world's great hotels. it's gonna be the best hotel in washington, d.c. we got it from the general services administration in washington. the obama administration. we got it. it was the most highly sought after — or one of them, but i think the most highly sought after project in the history of general services. we got it. people were shocked, trump got it.

well, i got it for two reasons. number one, we're really good. number two, we had a really good plan. and i'll add in the third, we had a great financial statement. because the general services, who are terrific people, by the way, and talented people, they wanted to do a great job. and they wanted to make sure it got built.

trump: so we have to rebuild our infrastructure, our bridges, our roadways, our airports. you come into la guardia airport, it's like we're in a third world country. you look at the patches and the 40-year-old floor. they throw down asphalt, and they throw.

you look at these airports, we are like a third world country. and i come in from china and i come in from qatar and i come in from different places, and they have the most incredible airports in the world. you come to back to this country and you have lax, disaster. you have all of these disastrous airports. we have to rebuild our infrastructure.

save medicare, medicaid and social security without cuts. have to do it.

get rid of the fraud. get rid of the waste and abuse, but save it. people have been paying it for years. and now many of these candidates want to cut it. you save it by making the united states, by making us rich again, by taking back all of the money that's being lost.

renegotiate our foreign trade deals.

audience member: yes.

trump: reduce our $18 trillion in debt, because, believe me, we're in a bubble. we have artificially low interest rates. we have a stock market that, frankly, has been good to me, but i still hate to see what's happening. we have a stock market that is so bloated.

be careful of a bubble because what you've seen in the past might be small potatoes compared to what happens. so be very, very careful.

and strengthen our military and take care of our vets. so, so important.

audience member: yes.

trump: sadly, the american dream is dead.

audience member: bring it back.

trump: but if i get elected president i will bring it back bigger and better and stronger than ever before, and we will make america great again.

thank you. thank you very much. good evening. thank you very much. i speak to you today as a lifelong supporter and true friend of israel. i'm a newcomer to politics, but not to backing the jewish state.

in 2001, weeks after the attacks on new york city and on washington and frankly, the attacks on all of us, attacks that perpetrated and they were perpetrated by the islamic fundamentalists, mayor rudy giuliani visited israel to show solidarity with terror victims. i sent my plane, because i backed the mission for israel 100 percent.

in spring of 2004, at the height of the violence in the gaza strip, i was the grand marshal of the 40th salute to israel parade, the largest single gathering in support of the jewish state. it was a very dangerous time for israel, and frankly, for anyone supporting israel. many people turned down this honor; i did not. i took the risk and i'm glad i did.

but i didn't come here tonight to pander to you about israel. that's what politicians do, all talk, no action, believe me. i came here to speak to you about where i stand on the future of american relations with our strategic ally, our unbreakable friendship and our cultural brother, the only democracy in the middle east, the state of israel.

thank you. my number one priority is to dismantle the disastrous deal with iran. thank you. i have been in business a long time, i know deal making and let me tell you, this deal is catastrophic for america, for israel and for the whole of the middle east.

the problem here is fundamental. we've rewarded the world's leading state sponsor of terror with 150 billion dollars and we received absolutely nothing in return. i've studied this issue in great detail. i would say, actually, greater by far than anybody else, believe me, oh, believe me.

and it's a bad deal. the biggest concern with the deal is not necessarily that iran is going to violate it, because already as you know, it has. the bigger problem is that they can keep the terms and still get the bomb by simply running out the clock. and of course, they'll keep the billions and billions of dollars that we so stupidly and foolishly gave them.

the deal doesn't even require iran to dismantle its military nuclear capability. yes, it places limits on its military nuclear program for only a certain number of years, but when those restrictions expire, iran will have an industrial-sized military nuclear capability ready to go and with zero provision for delay no matter how bad iran's behavior is. terrible, terrible situation that we are all placed in, and especially israel.

when i'm president, i will adopt a strategy that focuses on three things when it comes to iran. first, we will stand up to iran's aggressive push to destabilize and dominate the region.

iran is a very big problem and will continue to be, but if i'm not elected president, i know how to deal with trouble, and believe me, that's why i'm going to be elected president, folks. and we are leading in every poll, remember that, please.

iran is a problem in iraq, a problem in syria, a problem in lebanon, a problem in yemen and will be a very, very major problem for saudi arabia. literally, every day iran provides more and better weapons to support their puppet states, hezbollah, lebanon received, and i'll tell you what, it has received sophisticated anti-ship weapons, anti-aircraft weapons and gps systems and rockets like very few people anywhere in the world and certainly very few countries have.

now they're in syria trying to establish another front against israel from the syrian side of the golan heights. in gaza, iran is supporting hamas, and islamic jihad. and in the west bank, they're openly offering palestinians 7,000 dollars per terror attack and 30,000 dollars for every palestinian terrorist home that's been destroyed, a deplorable, deplorable situation.

iran is financing military forces throughout the middle east and it's absolutely incredible that we handed them over 150 billion dollars to do even more toward the many horrible acts of terror.

secondly, we will totally dismantle iran's global terror network, which is big and powerful, but not powerful like us.

iran has seeded terror groups all over the world. during the last five years, iran has perpetuated terror attacks in 25 different countries on five continents. they've got terror cells everywhere, including in the western hemisphere very close to home. iran is the biggest sponsor of terrorism around the world and we will work to dismantle that reach, believe me, believe me.

third, at the very least, we must enforce the terms of the previous deal to hold iran totally accountable and we will enforce it like you've never seen a contract enforced before, folks, believe me.

iran has already, since the deal is in place, test-fired ballistic missiles three times. those ballistic missiles, with a range of 1,250 miles, were designed to intimidate not only israel, which is only 600 miles away, but also intended to frighten europe and someday maybe hit even the united states and we're not going to let that happen, we're not letting it happen and we're not letting it happen to israel, believe me.

thank you. do you want to hear something really shocking? as many of the great people in this room know, painted on those missiles in both hebrew and farsi were the words "israel must be wiped off the face of the earth." you can forget that.

what kind of demented minds write that in hebrew? and here's another. you talk about twisted, here's another twisted part. testing these missiles does not even violate the horrible deal that we've made. the deal is silent on test missiles, but those tests do violate the united nations security council resolutions. the problem is, no one has done anything about it. we will, i promise, we will.

thank you. which brings me to my next point, the utter weakness and incompetence of the united nations. the united nations is not a friend of democracy, it's not a friend to freedom, it's not a friend even to the united states of america; whereas you know it has its home and it surely is not a friend to israel.

with president obama, in his final year, yay, he may be the worst thing to ever happen to israel, believe me, believe me, and you know it better than anybody. so with the president in his final year, discussions have been swirling about an attempt to bring a security council resolution on terms of an eventual agreement between israel and palestine. let me be clear, an agreement imposed by the united nations would be a total and complete disaster.

the united states must oppose this resolution and use the power of our veto, which i will use as president 100 percent.

when people ask why, it's because that's not how you make a deal. deals are made when parties come together, they come to a table and they negotiate. each side must give up something, its values. i mean, we have to do something where there's value in exchange for something that it requires. that's what a deal is.

a deal is really something that when we impose it on israel and palestine, we bring together a group of people that come up with something. that's not going to happen with the united nations. it will only further, very importantly, it will only further delegitimize israel. it will be a catastrophe and a disaster for israel. it's not going to happen, folks.

and further, it would reward palestinian terrorism, because every day they're stabbing israelis and even americans. just last week, american taylor allen force, a west point grad, phenomenal young person who served in iraq and afghanistan was murdered in the street by a knife-wielding palestinian. you don't reward behavior like that. you cannot do it. there's only one way you treat that kind of behavior. you have to confront it.

so it's not up to the united nations to really go with a solution. it's really the parties that must negotiate a resolution themselves. they have no choice, they have to do it themselves or it will never hold up anyway. the united states can be useful as a facilitator of negotiations, but no one should be telling israel that it must abide by some agreement made by others thousands of miles away that don't even really know what's happening to israel, to anything in the area. it's so preposterous. we're not going to let that happen.

when i'm president, believe me, i will veto any attempt by the u.n. to impose its will on the jewish state. it will be vetoed 100 percent.

you see, i know about deal making, that's what i do. i wrote the art of the deal. one of the bestselling all-time, and i mean, seriously, i'm saying "one of," because i'll be criticized if i say "the," so i'm going to be very diplomatic, "one of," i'll be criticized, i think it is

number one, but why take a chance. one of the all-time bestselling books about deals and deal making.

to make a great deal, you need two willing participants. we know israel is willing to deal. israel has been trying.

that's right. israel has been trying to sit down at the negotiating table without pre-conditions for years. you had camp david in 2000 where prime minister barak made an incredible offer, maybe even too generous; arafat rejected it. in 2008, prime minister olmert made an equally generous offer; the palestinian authority rejected it also.

then john kerry tried to come up with the framework and abbas didn't even respond, not even to the secretary of state of the united states of america. they didn't even respond. when i become president, the days of treating israel like a second-class citizen will end on day one.

thank you. and when i say something, i mean it.

i will meet with prime minister netanyahu immediately. i have known him for many years and we'll be able to work closely together to help bring stability and peace to israel and to the entire region. meanwhile, every single day you have rampant incitement and children being taught to hate israel and to hate the jews. it has to stop.

when you live in a society where the firefighters are the heroes, little kids want to be firefighters. when you live in a society where athletes and movie stars are the heroes, little kids want to be athletes and movie stars. in palestinian society, the heroes are those who murder jews. we can't let this continue. we can't let this happen any longer.

you cannot achieve peace if terrorists are treated as martyrs. glorifying terrorists is a tremendous barrier to peace. it is a horrible way to think. it's a barrier that can't be broken. that will end and it'll end soon, believe me. in palestinian textbooks and mosques, you've got a culture of hatred that has been fomenting there for years and if we want to achieve peace, they've got to go out and they've got to start  this educational process. they have to end education of hatred. they have to end it and now.

there is no moral equivalency. israel does not name public squares after terrorists. israel does not pay its children to stab random palestinians. you see, what president obama gets wrong about deal making is that he constantly applies pressure to our friends and rewards our enemies.

and you see that happening all the time, that pattern practiced by the president and his administration, including former secretary of state hillary clinton who is a total disaster, by the way. she and president obama have treated israel very, very badly.

but it's repeated itself over and over again and it's done nothing to embolden those who hate america. we saw that with releasing the 150 billion dollars to iran in the hope that they would magically join the world community. it didn't happen.

president obama thinks that applying pressure to israel will force the issue, but it's precisely the opposite that happens. already half of the population of palestine has been taken over by the palestinian isis in hamas and the other half refuses to confront the first half. so it's a very difficult situation that's never going to get solved unless you have great leadership right here in the united states. we'll get it solved one way or the other. we will get it solved.

but when the united states stands with israel, the chances of peace really rise and rises exponentially. that's what will happen when  is president of the united states.

we will move the american embassy to the eternal capital of the jewish people, jerusalem. and we will send a clear signal that there is no daylight between america and our most reliable ally, the state of israel.

the palestinians must come to the table knowing that the bond between the united states and israel is absolutely totally unbreakable. they must come to the table willing and able to stop the terror being committed on a daily basis against israel. they must do that.

and they must come to the table willing to accept that israel is a jewish state and it will forever exist as a jewish state.

i love the people in this room. i love israel. i love israel. i've been with israel so long in terms of i've received some of my greatest honors from israel; my father before me, incredible. my daughter ivanka is about to have a beautiful jewish baby. in fact, it could be happening right now, which would be very nice as far as i'm concerned.

so i want to thank you very much, this has been a truly great honor. thank you, everybody. thank you. thank you very much.thank you for the opportunity to speak to you, and thank you to the center for national interest for honoring me with this invitation. it truly is a great honor. i’d like to talk today about how to develop a new foreign policy direction for our country, one that replaces randomness with purpose, ideology with strategy, and chaos with peace.

it’s time to shake the rust off america’s foreign policy. it’s time to invite new voices and new visions into the fold, something we have to do. the direction i will outline today will also return us to a timeless principle. my foreign policy will always put the interests of the american people and american security above all else. has to be first, has to be.

that will be the foundation of every single decision that i will make. america – thank you.

america first will be the major and overriding theme of my administration. but to chart our path forward, we must first briefly take a look back. we have a lot to be proud of.

in the 1940s we saved the world. the greatest generation beat back the nazis and japanese imperialists. then we saved the world again. this time, from totalitarianism and communism. the cold war, it lasted for decades but, guess what, we won and we won big. democrats and republicans working together got mr. gorbachev to heed the words of president reagan, our great president, when he said, “tear down this wall.”

history will not forget what he did. very special, special man and president. unfortunately, after the cold war our foreign policy veered badly off course. we failed to develop a new vision for a new time. in fact, as time went on, our foreign policy began to make less and less sense. logic was replaced with foolishness and arrogance, which led to one foreign policy disaster after another.

they just kept coming and coming. we went from mistakes in iraq to egypt to libya, to president obama’s line in the sand in syria. each of these actions have helped to throw the region into chaos and gave isis the space it needs to grow and prosper. very bad. it all began with a dangerous idea that we could make western democracies out of countries that had no experience or interest in becoming a western democracy.

we tore up what institutions they had and then were surprised at what we unleashed. civil war, religious fanaticism, thousands of americans and just killed lives, lives, lives wasted. horribly wasted. many trillions of dollars were lost as a result. the vacuum was created that isis would fill. iran, too, would rush in and fill that void much to their really unjust enrichment.

they have benefited so much, so sadly, for us. our foreign policy is a complete and total disaster. no vision. no purpose. no direction. no strategy. today i want to identify five main weaknesses in our foreign policy.

first, our resources are totally over extended. president obama has weakened our military by weakening our economy. he’s crippled us with wasteful spending, massive debt, low growth, a huge trade deficit and open borders. our manufacturing trade deficit with the world is now approaching $1 trillion a year.

we’re rebuilding other countries while weakening our own. ending the theft of american jobs will give us resources we need to rebuild our military, which has to happen and regain our financial independence and strength. i am the only person running for the presidency who understands this and this is a serious problem.

i’m the only one — believe me, i know them all, i’m the only one that knows how to fix it.

secondly, our allies are not paying their fair share, and i’ve been talking about this recently a lot. our allies must contribute toward their financial, political, and human costs, have to do it, of our tremendous security burden. but many of them are simply not doing so.

they look at the united states as weak and forgiving and feel no obligation to honor their agreements with us. in nato, for instance, only 4 of 28 other member countries besides america, are spending the minimum required 2 percent of gdp on defense. we have spent trillions of dollars over time on planes, missiles, ships, equipment, building up our military to provide a strong defense for europe and asia.

the countries we are defending must pay for the cost of this defense, and if not, the u.s. must be prepared to let these countries defend themselves. we have no choice.

the whole world will be safer if our allies do their part to support our common defense and security. a trump administration will lead a free world that is properly armed and funded, and funded beautifully.

thirdly, our friends are beginning to think they can’t depend on us. we’ve had a president who dislikes our friends and bows to our enemies, something that we’ve never seen before in the history of our country. he negotiated disastrous deal with iran, and then we watched them ignore its terms even before the ink was dry. iran cannot be allowed to have a nuclear weapon, cannot be allowed. remember that, cannot be allowed to have a nuclear weapon.

and under a trump administration, will never, ever be allowed to have that nuclear weapon.

all of this without even mentioning the humiliation of the united states with iran’s treatment of our ten captured sailors — so vividly i remember that day. in negotiation, you must be willing to walk. the iran deal, like so many of our worst agreements, is the result of not being willing to leave the table.

when the other side knows you’re not going to walk, it becomes absolutely impossible to win — you just can’t win. at the same time, your friends need to know that you will stick by the agreements that you have with them. you’ve made that agreement, you have to stand by it and the world will be a better place. president obama gutted our missile defense program, then abandoned our missile defense plans with poland and the czech republic. he supported the ouster of a friendly regime in egypt that had a longstanding peace treaty with israel, and then helped bring the muslim brotherhood to power in its place.

israel, our great friend and the one true democracy in the middle east has been snubbed and criticized by an administration that lacks moral clarity. just a few days ago, vice president biden again criticized israel, a force for justice and peace, for acting as an impatient peace area in the region.

president obama has not been a friend to israel. he has treated iran with tender love and care and made it a great power. iran has, indeed, become a great, great power in just a very short period of time, because of what we’ve done. all of the expense and all at the expense of israel, our allies in the region and very importantly, the united states itself.

we’ve picked fights with our oldest friends, and now they’re starting to look elsewhere for help. remember that. not good.

fourth, our rivals no longer respect us. in fact, they’re just as confused as our allies, but in an even bigger problem is they don’t take us seriously anymore. the truth is they don’t respect us. when president obama landed in cuba on air force one, no leader was there, nobody, to greet him.

perhaps an incident without precedent in the long and prestigious history of air force one. then amazingly, the same thing happened in saudi arabia. it’s called no respect. absolutely no respect.

do you remember when the president made a long and expensive trip to copenhagen, denmark, to get the olympics for our country, and after this unprecedented effort, it was announced that the united states came in fourth — fourth place? the president of the united states making this trip — unprecedented — comes in fourth place. he should have known the result before making such an embarrassing commitment. we were laughed at all over the world, as we have been many, many times.

the list of humiliations go on and on and on. president obama watches helplessly as north korea increases its aggression and expands further and further with its nuclear reach. our president has allowed china to continue its economic assault on american jobs and wealth, refusing to enforce trade deals and apply leverage on china necessary to rein in north korea. we have the leverage. we have the power over china, economic power, and people don’t understand it. and with that economic power, we can rein in and we can get them to do what they have to do with north korea, which is totally out of control.

he has even allowed china to steal government secrets with cyber attacks and engaged in industrial espionage against the united states and its companies. we’ve let our rivals and challengers think they can get away with anything, and they do. they do at will. it always happens. if president obama’s goal had been to weaken america, he could not have done a better job.

finally, america no longer has a clear understanding of our foreign policy goals. since the end of the cold war and the breakup of the soviet union, we’ve lacked a coherent foreign policy. one day, we’re bombing libya and getting rid of a dictator to foster democracy for civilians. the next day, we’re watching the same civilians suffer while that country falls and absolutely falls apart. lives lost, massive moneys lost. the world is a different place.

we’re a humanitarian nation, but the legacy of the obama-clinton interventions will be weakness, confusion and disarray, a mess. we’ve made the middle east more unstable and chaotic than ever before. we left christians subject to intense persecution and even genocide.

we have done nothing to help the christians, nothing, and we should always be ashamed for that, for that lack of action. our actions in iraq, libya and syria have helped unleash isis, and we’re in a war against radical islam, but president obama won’t even name the enemy, and unless you name the enemy, you will never, ever solve the problem.

hillary clinton also refuses to say the words radical islam, even as she pushes for a massive increase in refugees coming into our country. after secretary clinton’s failed intervention in libya, islamic terrorists in benghazi took down our consulate and killed our ambassador and three brave americans. then, instead of taking charge that night, hillary clinton decided to go home and sleep. incredible.

clinton blames it all on a video, an excuse that was a total lie, proven to be absolutely a total lie. our ambassador was murdered and our secretary of state misled the nation. and, by the way, she was not awake to take that call at 3 o’clock in the morning. and now isis is making millions and millions of dollars a week selling libya oil. and you know what? we don’t blockade, we don’t bomb, we don’t do anything about it. it’s almost as if our country doesn’t even know what’s happening, which could be a fact and could be true.

this will all change when i become president.

to our friends and allies, i say america is going to be strong again. america is going to be reliable again. it’s going to be a great and reliable ally again. it’s going to be a friend again. we’re going to finally have a coherent foreign policy based upon american interests and the shared interests of our allies.

we’re getting out of the nation-building business and instead focusing on creating stability in the world. our moments of greatest strength came when politics ended at the water’s edge. we need a new rational american foreign policy, informed by the best minds and supported by both parties, and it will be by both parties — democrats, republicans, independents, everybody, as well as by our close allies.

this is how we won the cold war and it’s how we will win our new future struggles, which may be many, which may be complex, but we will win if i become president.

first, we need a long-term plan to halt the spread and reach of radical islam. containing the spread of radical islam must be a major foreign policy goal of the united states and indeed the world. events may require the use of military force, but it’s also a philosophical struggle, like our long struggle in the cold war.

in this, we’re going to be working very closely with our allies in the muslim world, all of which are at risk from radical islamic violence, attacks and everything else. it is a dangerous world, more dangerous now than it has ever been.

we should work — thank you.

we should work together with any nation in the region that is threatened by the rise of radical islam. but this has to be a two-way street. they must also be good to us. remember that. they have to be good to us, no longer one way. it’s now two-way. and remember, us and all we’re doing, they have to appreciate what we’ve done to them. we’re going to help, but they have to appreciate what we’ve done for them. the struggle against radical islam also takes place in our homeland. there are scores of recent migrants inside our borders charged with terrorism. for every case known to the public, there are dozens and dozens more. we must stop importing extremism through senseless immigration policies. we have no idea where these people are coming from. there’s no documentation. there’s no paperwork. there’s nothing. we have to be smart. we have to be vigilant.

a pause for reassessment will help us to prevent the next san bernardino or frankly, much worse. all you have to do is look at the world trade center and september 11th, one of the great catastrophes, in my opinion, the single greatest military catastrophe in the history of our country; worse than pearl harbor because you take a look at what’s happened, and citizens were attacked, as opposed to the military being attacked — one of the true great catastrophes.

and then there’s isis. i have a simple message for them. their days are numbered. i won’t tell them where and i won’t tell them how. we must …

… we must as a nation be more unpredictable. we are totally predictable. we tell everything. we’re sending troops. we tell them. we’re sending something else. we have a news conference. we have to be unpredictable. and we have to be unpredictable starting now.

but they’re going to be gone. isis will be gone if i’m elected president. and they’ll be gone quickly. they will be gone very, very quickly.

secondly, we have to rebuild our military and our economy. the russians and chinese have rapidly expanded their military capability, but look at what’s happened to us. our nuclear weapons arsenal, our ultimate deterrent, has been allowed to atrophy and is desperately in need of modernization and renewal. and it has to happen immediately. our active duty armed forces have shrunk from 2 million in 1991 to about 1.3 million today. the navy has shrunk from over 500 ships to 272 ships during this same period of time. the air force is about one-third smaller than 1991. pilots flying b-52s in combat missions today. these planes are older than virtually everybody in this room.

and what are we doing about this? president obama has proposed a 2017 defense budget that, in real dollars, cuts nearly 25 percent from what we were spending in 2011. our military is depleted, and we’re asking our generals and military leaders to worry about global warming.

we will spend what we need to rebuild our military. it is the cheapest, single investment we can make. we will develop, build and purchase the best equipment known to mankind. our military dominance must be unquestioned, and i mean unquestioned, by anybody and everybody.

but we will look for savings and spend our money wisely. in this time of mounting debt, right now we have so much debt that nobody even knows how to address the problem. but i do. no one dollar can be wasted. not one single dollar can we waste. we’re also going to have to change our trade, immigration and economic policies to make our economy strong again. and to put americans first again.

this will ensure that our own workers, right here in america, get the jobs and higher pay that will grow our tax revenues, increase our economic might as a nation, make us strong financially again. so, so important. we need to think smarter about areas where our technological superiority, and nobody comes close, gives us an edge. this includes 3d printing, artificial intelligence and cyber warfare.

a great country also takes care of its warriors. our commitment to them is absolute, and i mean absolute. a trump administration will give our servicemen and women the best equipment and support in the world when they serve and where they serve. and the best care in the world when they return as veterans and they come back home to civilian life. our veterans …

… our veterans have not been treated fairly or justly. these are our great people and we must treat them fairly. we must even treat them really, really well and that will happen under the trump administration.

finally, we must develop a foreign policy based on american interests. businesses do not succeed when they lose sight of their core interests and neither do countries. look at what happened in the 1990s. our embassies in kenya and tanzania — and this was a horrible period of time for us — were attacked, and 17 brave sailors were killed on the uss cole.

and what did we do? it seemed we put more effort into adding china into the world trade organization, which has been a total disaster for the united states. frankly, we spent more time on that than we did in stopping al qaida. we even had an opportunity to take out osama bin laden and we didn’t do it.

and then we got hit at the world trade center and the pentagon. again, the worst attack on our country in its history. our foreign policy goals must be based on america’s core national security interests. and the following will be my priorities.

in the middle east our goals must be, and i mean must be, to defeat terrorists and promote regional stability, not radical change. we need to be clear sighted about the groups that will never be anything other than enemies. and believe me, we have groups that no matter what you do, they will be the enemy.

we have to be smart enough to recognize who those groups are, who those people are, and not help them. and we must only be generous to those that prove they are indeed our friends.

we desire to live peacefully and in friendship with russia and china. we have serious differences with these two nations, and must regard them with open eyes, but we are not bound to be adversaries. we should seek common ground based on shared interests.

russia, for instance, has also seen the horror of islamic terrorism. i believe an easing of tensions, an improved relations with russia from a position of strength only is possible, absolutely possible. common sense says this cycle, this horrible cycle of hostility must end and ideally will end soon. good for both countries.

some say the russians won’t be reasonable. i intend to find out. if we can’t make a deal under my administration, a deal that’s great — not good, great — for america, but also good for russia, then we will quickly walk from the table. it’s as simple as that. we’re going to find out.

fixing our relations with china is another important step — and really toward creating a even more prosperous period of time. china respects strength and by letting them take advantage of us economically, which they are doing like never before, we have lost all of their respect.

we have a massive trade deficit with china, a deficit that we have to find a way quickly, and i mean quickly, to balance. a strong and smart america is an america that will find a better friend in china, better than we have right now. look at what china is doing in the south china sea. they’re not supposed to be doing it.

no respect for this country or this president. we can both benefit or we can both go our separate ways. if need be, that’s what’s going to have to happen.

after i’m elected president, i will also call for a summit with our nato allies and a separate summit with our asian allies. in these summits, we will not only discuss a rebalancing of financial commitments, but take a fresh look at how we can adopt new strategies for tackling our common challenges. for instance, we will discuss how we can upgrade nato’s outdated mission and structure, grown out of the cold war to confront our shared challenges, including migration and islamic terrorism.

i will not hesitate to deploy military force when there is no alternative. but if america fights, it must only fight to win.

i will never send our finest into battle unless necessary, and i mean absolutely necessary, and will only do so if we have a plan for victory with a capital v.

our goal is peace and prosperity, not war and destruction. the best way to achieve those goals is through a disciplined, deliberate and consistent foreign policy. with president obama and secretary clinton we’ve had the exact opposite — a reckless, rudderless and aimless foreign policy, one that has blazed a path of destruction in its wake.

after losing thousands of lives and spending trillions of dollars, we are in far worst shape in the middle east than ever, ever, ever before. i challenge anyone to explain the strategic foreign policy vision of obama-clinton. it has been a complete and total disaster.

i will also be prepared to deploy america’s economic resources. financial leverage and sanctions can be very, very persuasive, but we need to use them selectively and with total determination.

our power will be used if others do not play by the rules. in other words, if they do not treat us fairly. our friends and enemies must know that if i draw a line in the sand, i will enforce that line in the sand. believe me.

however, unlike other candidates for the presidency, war and aggression will not be my first instinct. you cannot have a foreign policy without diplomacy. a superpower understands that caution and restraint are really, truly signs of strength. although not in government service, i was totally against the war in iraq, very proudly, saying for many years that it would destabilize the middle east. sadly, i was correct, and the biggest beneficiary has been iran, who is systematically taking over iraq and gaining access to their very, very rich oil reserves, something it has wanted to do for decades.

and now, to top it off, we have isis. my goal is to establish a foreign policy that will endure for several generations. that’s why i also look and have to look for talented experts with approaches and practical ideas, rather than surrounding myself with those who have perfect resumes but very little to brag about except responsibility for a long history of failed policies and continued losses at war. we have to look to new people.

we have to look to new people because many of the old people frankly don’t know what they’re doing, even though they may look awfully good writing in the new york times or being watched on television.

finally, i will work with our allies to reinvigorate western values and institutions. instead of trying to spread universal values that not everybody shares or wants, we should understand that strengthening and promoting western civilization and its accomplishments will do more to inspire positive reforms around the world than military interventions.

these are my goals as president. i will seek a foreign policy that all americans, whatever their party, can support, so important, and which our friends and allies will respect and totally welcome. the world must know that we do not go abroad in search of enemies, that we are always happy when old enemies become friends and when old friends become allies, that’s what we want. we want them to be our allies.

we want the world to be our — we want to bring peace to the world. too much destruction out there, too many destructive weapons. the power of weaponry is the single biggest problem that we have today in the world.

to achieve these goals, americans must have confidence in their country and its leadership. again, many americans must wonder why our politicians seem more interested in defending the borders of foreign countries than in defending their own. americans …

… americans must know that we’re putting the american people first again on trade.

so true. on trade, on immigration, on foreign policy. the jobs, incomes and security of the american worker will always be my first priority.

no country has ever prospered that failed to put its own interests first. both our friends and our enemies put their countries above ours and we, while being fair to them, must start doing the same. we will no longer surrender this country or its people to the false song of globalism. the nation-state remains the true foundation for happiness and harmony. i am skeptical of international unions that tie us up and bring america down and will never enter…

and under my administration, we will never enter america into any agreement that reduces our ability to control our own affairs.

nafta, as an example, has been a total disaster for the united states and has emptied our states — literally emptied our states of our manufacturing and our jobs. and i’ve just gotten to see it. i’ve toured pennsylvania. i’ve toured new york. i’ve toured so many of the states. they have been cleaned out. their manufacturing is gone.

never again, only the reverse — and i have to say this strongly — never again; only the reverse will happen. we will keep our jobs and bring in new ones. there will be consequences for the companies that leave the united states only to exploit it later. they fire the people. they take advantage of the united states. there will be consequences for those companies. never again.

under a trump administration, no american citizen will ever again feel that their needs come second to the citizens of a foreign country.

i will view as president the world through the clear lens of american interests. i will be america’s greatest defender and most loyal champion. we will not apologize for becoming successful again, but will instead embrace the unique heritage that makes us who we are.

the world is most peaceful and most prosperous when america is strongest. america will continue and continue forever to play the role of peacemaker. we will always help save lives and indeed humanity itself, but to play that role, we must make america strong again.

and always — always, always, we must make, and we have to look at it from every angle, and we have no choice, we must make america respected again. we must make america truly wealthy again. and we must — we have to and we will make america great again. and if we do that — and if we do that, perhaps this century can be the most peaceful and prosperous the world has ever, ever known. thank you very much, everybody. i appreciate it. thank you.

thank you very much.  wow. thank you very much. hello. i'd like to begin by thanking the people of montana, south dakota, new mexico, new jersey and california. we had some big, big days and we have some big numbers coming in, very big numbers.

i'm truly honored by your support. together, we accomplished what nobody thought was absolutely possible and you know what that is. we're only getting started and it's going to be beautiful, remember that.

tonight we close one chapter in history and we begin another. our campaign received more primary votes than any gop campaign in history. no matter who it is, no matter who they are, we received more votes.

this is—

great feeling. that's a great feeling. this is not a testament to me but a testament to all of the people who believed real change, not obama change, but real change is possible.

you've given me the honor to lead the republican party to victory this fall.

we're going to do it. we're going to do it, folks. we're going to do it. i understand the responsibility of carrying the mantle and i will never, ever let you down—too much work, too many people, blood sweat and tears, never going to let you down. i will make you proud of your party and our movement, and that's what it is, is a movement.

now, recent polls have shown i'm beating hillary clinton, and with all of her many problems and the tremendous mistakes that she's made—and she has made tremendous mistakes—we expect our lead to continue to grow and grow substantially.

to everyone who voted for me throughout this campaign, i want to thank you. i want to thank you very, very much.

to those who voted for someone else in either party, i'll work hard to earn your support. and i will work very hard to earn that support. to all of those bernie sanders voters who have been left out in the cold by a rigged system of super delegates, we welcome you with open arms.

believe me.

and by the way, the terrible trade deals that bernie was so vehemently against—and he's right on that—will be taken care of far better than anyone ever thought possible. and that's what i do. we are going to have fantastic trade deals. we're going to start making money and bringing in jobs.

now i know some people say i'm too much of a fighter. my preference is always peace, however. and i've shown that. i've shown that for a long time. i've built an extraordinary business on relationships and deals that benefit all parties involved, always. my goal is always, again, to bring people together. but if i'm forced to fight for something i really care about, i will never, ever back down, and our country will never, ever back down.

thank you.

i've fought for my family, i've fought for my business, i've fought for my employees, and now i'm going to fight for you, the american people, like nobody has ever fought before.

and i'm not a politician fighting, i'm me. you're going to see some real good things happen.

just remember this: i'm going to be your champion, i'm going to be america's champion, because, you see, this election isn't about republican or democrat, it's about who runs this country, the special interests, or the people, and i mean the american people.

every election year, politicians promise change. obama promised change, and it didn't work out too well. and every year they fail to deliver. why would politicians want to change a system that's totally rigged in order to keep them in power? that's what they're doing, folks. why would politicians want to change a system that's made them and their friends very, very wealthy?

i beat a rigged system by winning with overwhelming support—the only way you could have done it—landslides all over the country, with every demographic on track to win thirty-seven primary caucus victories in a field that began with seventeen very talented people.

after years of disappointment, there's one thing we all have learned. we can't fix the rigged system by relying on very—and i mean this so, so strongly—on the very people who rigged it. and they rigged it, and do not ever think anything differently. we can't solve our problems by counting on the politicians who created our problems.

the clintons have turned the politics of personal enrichment into an art form for themselves.

they've made hundreds of millions of dollars selling access, selling favors, selling government contracts—and i mean hundreds of millions of dollars. secretary clinton even did all of the work on a totally illegal private server—something that how she's getting away with this, folks, nobody understands—designed to keep her corrupt dealings out of the public record, putting the security of the entire country at risk, and a president in a corrupt system is totally protecting her.

not right.

i am going to give a major speech on probably monday of next week, and we're going to be discussing all of the things that have taken place with the clintons. i think you're going to find it very informative, and very, very interesting.

i wonder if the press will want to attend. who knows? hillary clinton turned the state department into her private hedge fund. the russians, the saudis, the chinese all gave money to bill and hillary and got favorable treatment in return.

it's a sad day in america when foreign governments with deep pockets have more influence in our own country than our great citizens.

i didn't need to do this, it's not easy, believe me, i didn't need to do it, but i felt i had to give back to our wonderful country which has been so good to me and to my family.

i've traveled to many of our states and seen the suffering in people's eyes. i've visited communities in new york, new jersey, pennsylvania, connecticut, indiana, and ohio, whose manufacturing jobs—they, literally, these jobs have virtually disappeared. an embarrassment to our country, and it's horrible.

i've embraced the victims of illegal immigration, moms and dads who have had to bury their own children because of people that shouldn't have been in the country.

remember it, folks. remember it.

i visited the crumbling cities and the struggling schools. i've seen our dilapidated airports, highways, bridges, and i've compared them to other countries where we see facilities so far superior to ours, it's really not to be believed. hard to imagine what's happened to our country.

america is getting taken apart piece by piece. auctioned off—and just rapidly—auctioned off to the highest bidder.

we're broke. we're broke.

we owe nineteen trillion dollars going quickly to twenty trillion dollars. our infrastructure is a disaster. our schools are failing. crime is rising. people are scared. the last thing we need is hillary clinton in the white house, or an extension of the obama disaster.



what a crowd, what a crowd. thank you all very much. we love our country; we love our country.

but we can turn this all around. we're going to do it by putting "america first."

that commitment is the foundation for change that's been missing—and it's been missing for a long time.

it's important to understand what "america first" means. it means, on foreign policy, we will never enter into any conflict unless it makes us safer as a nation. it has to make us safer as a nation.

this is—this is the opposite of hillary's foreign policy, which invaded libya, destabilized iraq, unleashed isis, and threw syria into chaos, and created the mass migration which is wreaking havoc all over the world. and, while putting iran on the path to nuclear weapons and making them a dominant power in the middle east. and they are dominant, and we have made them that way, folks. we have made them that way.

better hope i'm president.

on trade, "america first" means the american worker will have his or her job protected from unfair foreign competition. what's happening there is absolutely a disgrace. no tpp—you're right about that. so, and you mean no pp.

we are going—and remember this, we are only going to have great trade deals, okay? we are only going to have that. we're not going to approve, as somebody just said, the trans-pacific partnership, which is a disaster, a disaster for our country. almost as bad as nafta, signed by bill clinton, which has just stripped our country of our factories and our manufacturing, and moved them to other places, in particular, mexico.

if it's not a great deal for our country, we will not sign it. it's got to be great for our country, for our community, for everybody in here because, believe me, we are all suffering. and we're suffering big league, and it's getting worse.

on energy policy, "america first" means opening up america's great potential to bring wealth and prosperity to our own workers, including our wonderful and hard working miners who have been absolutely, totally mistreated by this administration.

on economic policy, "america first" means having tax and regulatory policies that keep jobs and wealth in the united states, substantially lowering taxes for middle class americans and businesses. likewise, regulation, which is strangling our economy, which would be brought down from its present insane level, we will make it very, very good for our companies, for our small businesses, and for people that want to survive and do well in our country.

on immigration policy, "america first" means protecting the jobs, wages, and security of american workers. whether first or tenth generation, no matter who you are, we're going to protect your job because, let me tell you, our jobs are being stripped from our country like we're babies.

the beauty of "america first" is that it brings us all together. every american worker of every background is entitled to the same benefits, protections, and rights and privileges. it's got to be that way.

now, the people in charge say, "things can't change." i'm here today to tell you that we have to change. we have no choice. we have to change.

we're going to put—thank you. we're going to put america back to work. we're going to make our own products. we're going to put america back to work.

we're going to rebuild our inner cities, which are absolutely a shame, and so sad. we're going to take care of our african american people that have been mistreated for so long.

we're going to make you and your family safe, secure, and prosperous, prosperous again. together we will put the american people first again. first again.

we will make our communities wealthy, we will make our cities safe again, we will make our country strong again. ladies and gentlemen, we will "make america great again." remember. thank you.

thank you. thank you. thank you very much, everybody.thank you for joining me today.

this was going to be a speech on hillary clinton and how bad a president, especially in these times of radical islamic terrorism, she would be.

even her former secret service agent, who has seen her under pressure and in times of stress, has stated that she lacks the temperament and integrity to be president.

there will be plenty of opportunity to discuss these important issues at a later time, and i will deliver that speech soon.

but today there is only one thing to discuss: the growing threat of terrorism inside of our borders.

the attack on the pulse nightclub in orlando, florida, was the worst terrorist strike on our soil since september 11th, and the worst mass shooting in our country's history.

so many people dead, so many people gravely injured, so much carnage, such a disgrace.

the horror is beyond description.

the families of these wonderful people are totally devastated. likewise, our whole nation, and indeed the whole world, is devastated.

we express our deepest sympathies to the victims, the wounded, and their families.

we mourn, as one people, for our nation's loss – and pledge our support to any and all who need it.

i would like to ask now that we all observe a moment of silence for the victims of the attack.



our nation stands together in solidarity with the members of orlando's lgbt community.

this is a very dark moment in america's history.

a radical islamic terrorist targeted the nightclub not only because he wanted to kill americans, but in order to execute gay and lesbian citizens because of their sexual orientation.

it is a strike at the heart and soul of who we are as a nation.

it is an assault on the ability of free people to live their lives, love who they want and express their identity.

it is an attack on the right of every single american to live in peace and safety in their own country.

we need to respond to this attack on america as one united people – with force, purpose and determination.

but the current politically correct response cripples our ability to talk and think and act clearly.

if we don't get tough, and we don't get smart – and fast – we're not going to have a country anymore -- there will be nothing left.

the killer, whose name i will not use, or ever say, was born to afghan parents who immigrated to the united states. his father published support for the afghan taliban, a regime which murders those who don't share its radical views. the father even said he was running for president of that country.

the bottom line is that the only reason the killer was in america in the first place was because we allowed his family to come here.

that is a fact, and it's a fact we need to talk about.

we have a dysfunctional immigration system which does not permit us to know who we let into our country, and it does not permit us to protect our citizens.

we have an incompetent administration, and if i am not elected president, that will not change over the next four years -- but it must change, and it must change now.

with fifty people dead, and dozens more wounded, we cannot afford to talk around the issue anymore -- we have to address it head on.

i called for a ban after san bernardino, and was met with great scorn and anger but now, many are saying i was right to do so -- and although the pause is temporary, we must find out what is going on. the ban will be lifted when we as a nation are in a position to properly and perfectly screen those people coming into our country.

the immigration laws of the united states give the president the power to suspend entry into the country of any class of persons that the president deems detrimental to the interests or security of the united states, as he deems appropriate.

i will use this power to protect the american people. when i am elected, i will suspend immigration from areas of the world when there is a proven history of terrorism against the united states, europe or our allies, until we understand how to end these threats.

after a full, impartial and long overdue security assessment, we will develop a responsible immigration policy that serves the interests and values of america.

we cannot continue to allow thousands upon thousands of people to pour into our country, many of whom have the same thought process as this savage killer.

many of the principles of radical islam are incompatible with western values and institutions.

radical islam is anti-woman, anti-gay and anti-american.

i refuse to allow america to become a place where gay people, christian people, and jewish people, are the targets of persecution and intimidation by radical islamic preachers of hate and violence.

it's not just a national security issue. it is a quality of life issue.

if we want to protect the quality of life for all americans – women and children, gay and straight, jews and christians and all people – then we need to tell the truth about radical islam.

we need to tell the truth, also, about how radical islam is coming to our shores.

we are importing radical islamic terrorism into the west through a failed immigration system -- and through an intelligence community held back by our president.

even our own fbi director has admitted that we cannot effectively check the backgrounds of the people we are letting into america.

all of the september 11th hijackers were issued visas.

large numbers of somali refugees in minnesota have tried to join isis.

the boston bombers came here through political asylum.

the male shooter in san bernardino – again, whose name i won't mention -- was the child of immigrants from pakistan, and he brought his wife – the other terrorist - from saudi arabia, through another one of our easily exploited visa programs.

immigration from afghanistan into the united states has increased nearly five-fold in just one year. according to pew research, 99% of people in afghanistan support oppressive sharia law.

we admit many more from other countries in the region who share these same oppressive views.

if we want to remain a free and open society, then we have to control our borders.

yet, hillary clinton – for months and despite so many attacks – repeatedly refused to even say the words "radical islam," until i challenged her yesterday to say the words or leave the race.

however, hillary clinton – who has been forced to say the words today after policies she supports have caused us so much damage – still has no clue what radical islam is, and won't speak honestly about what it is.

she is in total denial, and her continuing reluctance to ever name the enemy broadcasts weakness across the world.

in fact, just a few weeks before the san bernardino slaughter, hillary clinton explained her refusal to say the words radical islam. here is what she said: "muslims are peaceful and tolerant people, and have nothing whatsoever to do with terrorism."

hillary clinton says the solution is to ban guns. they tried that in france, which has among the toughest gun laws in the world, and 130 were brutally murdered by islamic terrorists in cold blood. her plan is to disarm law-abiding americans, abolishing the 2nd amendment, and leaving only the bad guys and terrorists with guns. she wants to take away americans' guns, then admit the very people who want to slaughter us.

i will be meeting with the nra, which has given me their earliest endorsement in a presidential race, to discuss how to ensure americans have the means to protect themselves in this age of terror.

the bottom line is that hillary supports the policies that bring the threat of radical islam into america, and allow it to grow overseas.

in fact, hillary clinton's catastrophic immigration plan will bring vastly more radical islamic immigration into this country, threatening not only our security but our way of life.

when it comes to radical islamic terrorism, ignorance is not bliss – it's deadly.

the obama administration, with the support of hillary clinton and others, has also damaged our security by restraining our intelligence-gathering and failing to support law enforcement. they have put political correctness above common sense, above your safety, and above all else.

i refuse to be politically correct.

i will do the right thing--i want to straighten things out and to make america great again.

the days of deadly ignorance will end, and they will end soon.

as president i will give our intelligence community, law enforcement and military the tools they need to prevent terrorist attacks.

we need an intelligence-gathering system second to none. that includes better cooperation between state, local and federal officials – and with our allies.

i will have an attorney general, a director of national intelligence, and a secretary of defense who will know how to fight the war on radical islamic terrorism – and who will have the support they require to get the job done.

we also must ensure the american people are provided the information they need to understand the threat.

the senate subcommittee on immigration has already identified hundreds of immigrants charged with terrorist activities inside the united states since september 11th.

nearly a year ago, the senate subcommittee asked president obama's departments of justice, state and homeland security to provide the immigration history of all terrorists inside the united states.

these departments refused to comply.

president obama must release the full and complete immigration histories of all individuals implicated in terrorist activity of any kind since 9/11.

the public has a right to know how these people got here.

we have to screen applicants to know whether they are affiliated with, or support, radical groups and beliefs.

we have to control the amount of future immigration into this country to prevent large pockets of radicalization from forming inside america.

even a single individual can be devastating, just look at what happened in orlando. can you imagine large groups?

truly, our president doesn't know what he is doing. he has failed us, and failed us badly, and under his leadership, this situation will not get any better -- it will only get worse.

each year, the united states permanently admits more than 100,000 immigrants from the middle east, and many more from muslim countries outside the middle east. our government has been admitting ever-growing numbers, year after year, without any effective plan for our security.

in fact, clinton's state department was in charge of the admissions process for people applying to enter from overseas.

having learned nothing from these attacks, she now plans to massively increase admissions without a screening plan, including a 500% increase in syrian refugees.

this could be a better, bigger version of the legendary trojan horse.

we can't let this happen.

altogether, under the clinton plan, you'd be admitting hundreds of thousands of refugees from the middle east with no system to vet them, or to prevent the radicalization of their children.

the burden is on hillary clinton to tell us why she believes immigration from these dangerous countries should be increased without any effective system to screen who we are bringing in.

the burden is on hillary clinton to tell us why we should admit anyone into our country who supports violence of any kind against gay and lesbian americans.

the burden is also on hillary clinton to tell us how she will pay for it. her plan will cost americans hundreds of billions of dollars long-term.

wouldn't this money be better spent on rebuilding america for our current population, including the many poor people already living here?

we have to stop the tremendous flow of syrian refugees into the united states – we don't know who they are, they have no documentation, and we don't know what they're planning.

what i want is common sense. i want a mainstream immigration policy that promotes american values.

that is the choice i put before the american people: a mainstream immigration policy designed to benefit america, or hillary clinton's radical immigration policy designed to benefit politically-correct special interests.

we've got to get smart, and tough, and vigilant, and we've got to do it now, because later is too late.

ask yourself, who is really the friend of women and the lgbt community,  with his actions, or hillary clinton with her words? clinton wants to allow radical islamic terrorists to pour into our country—they enslave women, and murder gays.

i don't want them in our country.

the terrorist attack on the pulse night club demands a full and complete investigation into every aspect of the assault.

in san bernardino, as an example, people knew what was going on, but they used the excuse of racial profiling for not reporting it.

we need to know what the killer discussed with his relatives, parents, friends and associates.

we need to know if he was affiliated with any radical mosques or radical activists and what, if any, is their immigration status.

we need to know if he travelled anywhere, and who he travelled with.

we need to make sure every single last person involved in this plan – including anyone who knew something but didn't tell us – is brought to justice.

if it can be proven that somebody had information about any attack, and did not give this information to authorities, they must serve prison time .

america must do more – much more – to protect its citizens, especially people who are potential victims of crimes based on their backgrounds or sexual orientations.

it also means we must change our foreign policy.

the decision to overthrow the regime in libya, then pushing for the overthrow of the regime in syria, among other things, without plans for the day after, have created space for isis to expand and grow.

these actions, along with our disastrous iran deal, have also reduced our ability to work in partnership with our muslim allies in the region.

that is why our new goal must be to defeat islamic terrorism, not nation-building.

for instance, the last major nato mission was hillary clinton's war in libya. that mission helped unleash isis on a new continent.

i've said nato needs to change its focus to stopping terrorism. since i've raised that criticism, nato has since announced a new initiative focused on just that.

america must unite the whole civilized world in the fight against islamic terrorism, just like we did against communism in the cold war.

we've tried it president obama's way. he gave the world his apology tour, we got isis, and many other problems, in return.

i'd like to conclude my remarks today by again expressing our solidarity with the people of orlando who have come under attack.

when i am president, i pledge to protect and defend all americans who live inside of our borders. wherever they come from, wherever they were born, all americans living here and following our laws will be protected.

america will be a tolerant and open society.

america will also be a safe society.

we will protect our borders at home.

we will defeat isis overseas.

we will ensure every parent can raise their children in peace and safety.

we will make america rich again.

we will make america safe again.

we will make american great again.

thank you.

the media talks about "homegrown," terrorism, but islamic radicalism, and the networks that nurture it, are imports from overseas.

yes, there are many radicalized people already inside our country as a result of the poor policies of the past. but the whole point is that it will be much, much easier to deal with our current problem if we don't keep on bringing in people who add to the problem.

for instance, the controversial mosque attended by the boston bombers had as its founder an immigrant from overseas charged in an assassination plot.

this shooter in orlando was the child of an immigrant father who supported one of the most repressive regimes on earth. why would we admit people who support violent hatred?

hillary clinton can never claim to be a friend of the gay community as long as she continues to support immigration policies that bring islamic extremists to our country who suppress women, gays and anyone who doesn't share their views.

she can't have it both ways. she can't claim to be supportive of these communities while trying to increase the number of people coming in who want to oppress them.

how does this kind of immigration make our life better? how does this kind of immigration make our country better?

why does hillary clinton want to bring people here—in vast numbers—who reject our values?

immigration is a privilege, and we should not let anyone into this country who doesn't support our communities – all of our communities.

america has already admitted four times more immigrants than any country on earth, and we continue to admit millions more with no real checks or scrutiny.

not surprisingly, wages for our workers haven't budged in many years.

so whether it's matter of national security, or financial security, we can't afford to keep on going like this. we owe $19 trillion in debt, and no longer have options.

all our communities, from all backgrounds, are ready for some relief. this is not an act of offense against anyone; it is an act of defense.

i want us all to work together, including in partnership with our muslim communities. but muslim communities must cooperate with law enforcement and turn in the people who they know are bad – and they do know where they are.

i want to fix our schools, roads, bridges and job market. i want every american to succeed. hillary clinton wants to empty out the treasury to bring people into the country that include individuals who preach hate against our own citizens.

i want to protect our citizens – all of our citizens.today i'd like to share my thoughts about the stakes in this election.

people have asked me why i am running for president.

i have built an amazing business that i love and i get to work side-by-side with my children every day.

we come to work together and turn visions into reality.

we think big, and then we make it happen.

i love what i do, and i am grateful beyond words to the nation that has allowed me to do it.

so when people ask me why i am running, i quickly answer: i am running to give back to this country which has been so good to me.

when i see the crumbling roads and bridges, or the dilapidated airports, or the factories moving overseas to mexico, or to other countries, i know these problems can all be fixed, but not by hillary clinton – only by me.

the fact is, we can come back bigger and better and stronger than ever before --jobs, jobs, jobs!

everywhere i look, i see the possibilities of what our country could be. but we can't solve any of these problems by relying on the politicians who created them.

we will never be able to fix a rigged system by counting on the same people who rigged it in the first place.

the insiders wrote the rules of the game to keep themselves in power and in the money.

that's why we're asking bernie sanders' voters to join our movement: so together we can fix the system for all americans. importantly, this includes fixing all of our many disastrous trade deals.

because it's not just the political system that's rigged. it's the whole economy.

it's rigged by big donors who want to keep down wages.

it's rigged by big businesses who want to leave our country, fire our workers, and sell their products back into the u.s. with absolutely no consequences for them.

it's rigged by bureaucrats who are trapping kids in failing schools.

it's rigged against you, the american people.

hillary clinton who, as most people know, is a world class liar –

just look at her pathetic email and server statements, or her phony landing in bosnia where she said she was under attack but the attack turned out to be young girls handing her flowers, a total self-serving lie.

brian williams' career was destroyed for saying far less.

yesterday, she even tried to attack me and my many businesses. but here is the bottom line: i started off in brooklyn new york, not so long ago, with a small loan and built a business worth over 10 billion dollars. i have always had a talent for building businesses and, importantly, creating jobs. that is a talent our country desperately needs.

i am running for president to end the unfairness and to put you, the american worker, first.

we are going to put america first, and we are going to make america great again.

this election will decide whether we are ruled by the people, or by the politicians.

here is my promise to the american voter:

if i am elected president, i will end the special interest monopoly in washington, d.c.

the other candidate in this race has spent her entire life making money for special interests – and taking money from special interests.

hillary clinton has perfected the politics of personal profit and theft.

she ran the state department like her own personal hedge fund – doing favors for oppressive regimes, and many others, in exchange for cash.

then, when she left, she made $21.6 million giving speeches to wall street banks and other special interests – in less than 2 years – secret speeches that she does not want to reveal to the public.

together, she and bill made $153 million giving speeches to lobbyists, ceos, and foreign governments in the years since 2001.

they totally own her, and that will never change.

the choice in this election is a choice between taking our government back from the special interests, or surrendering our last scrap of independence to their total and complete control.

those are the stakes.

hillary clinton wants to be president. but she doesn't have the temperament, or, as bernie sanders' said, the judgement, to be president.

she believes she is entitled to the office.

her campaign slogan is "i'm with her."

you know what my response to that is? i'm with you: the american people.

she thinks it's all about her.

i know it's all about you – i know it's all about making america great again for all americans.

our country lost its way when we stopped putting the american people first.

we got here because we switched from a policy of americanism – focusing on what's good for america's middle class – to a policy of globalism, focusing on how to make money for large corporations who can move their wealth and workers to foreign countries all to the detriment of the american worker and the american economy.

we reward companies for offshoring, and we punish companies for doing business in america and keeping our workers employed.

this is not a rising tide that lifts all boats.

this is a wave of globalization that wipes out our middle class and our jobs.

we need to reform our economic system so that, once again, we can all succeed together, and america can become rich again.

that's what we mean by america first.

our country will be better off when we start making our own products again, bringing our once great manufacturing capabilities back to our shores.

our founders understood this.

one of the first major bills signed by george washington called for "the encouragement and protection of manufactur[ing]" in america.

our first republican president, abraham lincoln, warned us by saying:

"the abandonment of the protective policy by the american government will produce want and ruin among our people."

i have visited the cities and towns across america and seen the devastation caused by the trade policies of bill and hillary clinton.

hillary clinton supported bill clinton's disastrous nafta, just like she supported china's entrance into the world trade organization.

we've lost nearly one-third of our manufacturing jobs since these two hillary-backed agreements were signed.

our trade deficit with china soared 40% during hillary clinton's time as secretary of state -- a disgraceful performance for which she should not be congratulated, but rather scorned.

then she let china steal hundreds of billions of dollars in our intellectual property – a crime which is continuing to this day.

hillary clinton gave china millions of our best jobs, and effectively let china completely rebuild itself.

in return, hillary clinton got rich!

the book clinton cash, by peter schweitzer, documents how bill and hillary used the state department to enrich their family at america's expense.

she gets rich making you poor.

here is a quote from the book: "at the center of us policy toward china was hillary clinton…at this critical time for us-china relations, bill clinton gave a number of speeches that were underwritten by the chinese government and its supporters."

these funds were paid to the clinton bank account while hillary was negotiating with china on behalf of the united states.

she sold out our workers, and our country, for beijing.

hillary clinton has also been the biggest promoter of the trans-pacific partnership, which will ship millions more of our jobs overseas – and give up congressional power to an international foreign commission.

now, because i have pointed out why it would be such a disastrous deal, she is pretending that she is against it. she has even deleted this record of total support from her book – deletion is something she is very good at -- (at least 30,000 emails are missing.)

but this latest clinton cover-up doesn't change anything: if she is elected president, she will adopt the trans-pacific partnership, and we will lose millions of jobs and our economic independence for good. she will do this, just as she has betrayed the american worker on trade at every single stage of her career – and it will be even worse than the clintons' nafta deal.

i want trade deals, but they have to be great for the united states and our workers.

we don't make great deals anymore, but we will once i become president.

it's not just our economy that's been corrupted, but our foreign policy too.

the hillary clinton foreign policy has cost america thousands of lives and trillions of dollars – and unleashed isis across the world.

no secretary of state has been more wrong, more often, and in more places than hillary clinton.

her decisions spread death, destruction and terrorism everywhere she touched.

among the victims is our late ambassador, chris stevens. he was left helpless to die as hillary clinton soundly slept in her bed -- that's right, when the phone rang at 3 o'clock in the morning, she was sleeping.

ambassador stevens and his staff in libya made hundreds of requests for security.

hillary clinton's state department refused them all.

she started the war that put him in libya, denied him the security he asked for, then left him there to die.

to cover her tracks, hillary lied about a video being the cause of his death.

here is what one of the victim's mothers had to say:

"i want the whole world to know it: she lied to my face, and you don't want this person to be president."

in 2009, before hillary clinton was sworn in, it was a different world.

libya was cooperating.

iraq was seeing a reduction in violence.

syria was under control.

iran was being choked by sanctions.

egypt was governed by a friendly regime that honored its peace treaty with israel.

isis wasn't even on the map.

fast forward to 2013: in just four years, secretary clinton managed

to almost single-handedly destabilize the entire middle east.

her invasion of libya handed the country over to the isis barbarians.

thanks to hillary clinton, iran is now the dominant islamic power in the middle east, and on the road to nuclear weapons.

hillary clinton's support for violent regime change in syria has thrown the country into one of the bloodiest civil wars anyone has ever seen – while giving isis a launching pad for terrorism against the west.

she helped force out a friendly regime in egypt and replace it with the radical muslim brotherhood. the egyptian military has retaken control, but clinton has opened the pandora's box of radical islam.

then, there was the disastrous strategy of announcing our departure date from iraq, handing large parts of the country over to isis killers.

isis threatens us today because of the decisions hillary clinton has made.

isis also threatens peaceful muslims across the middle east, and peaceful muslims across the world, who have been terribly victimized by horrible brutality – and who only want to raise their kids in peace and safety.

in short, hillary clinton's tryout for the presidency has produced one deadly foreign policy disaster after another.

it all started with her bad judgment in supporting the war in iraq in the first place.

though i was not in government service, i was among the earliest to criticize the rush to war, and yes, even before the war ever started.

but hillary clinton learned nothing from iraq, because when she got into power, she couldn't wait to rush us off to war in libya.

she lacks the temperament, the judgment and the competence to lead.

in the words of a secret service agent posted outside the oval office:

"she simply lacks the integrity and temperament to serve in the office…from the bottom of my soul, i know this to be true…her leadership style – volcanic, impulsive…disdainful of the rules set for everyone else – hasn't changed a bit."

perhaps the most terrifying thing about hillary clinton's foreign policy is that she refuses to acknowledge the threat posed by radical islam.

in fact, hillary clinton supports a radical 550% increase in syrian refugees coming into the united states, and that's an increase over president obama's already very high number.

under her plan, we would admit hundreds of thousands of refugees from the most dangerous countries on earth – with no way to screen who they are or what they believe.

already, hundreds of recent immigrants and their children have been convicted of terrorist activity inside the u.s.

the father of the orlando shooter was a taliban supporter from afghanistan, one of the most repressive anti-gay and anti-women regimes on earth.

i only want to admit people who share our values and love our people.

hillary clinton wants to bring in people who believe women should be enslaved and gays put to death.

maybe her motivation lies among the more than 1,000 foreign donations hillary failed to disclose while at the state department.

hillary clinton may be the most corrupt person ever to seek the presidency.

here is some more of what we learned from the book, clinton cash:

a foreign telecom giant faced possible state department sanctions for providing technology to iran, and other oppressive regimes. so what did this company do? for the first time ever, they decided to pay bill clinton $750,000 for a single speech. the clintons got their cash, the telecom company escaped sanctions.


hillary clinton's state department approved the transfer of 20% of america's uranium holdings to russia, while 9 investors in the deal funneled $145 million to the clinton foundation.


hillary clinton appointed a top donor to a national security board with top secret access – even though he had no national security credentials.


hillary clinton accepted $58,000 in jewelry from the government of brunei when she was secretary of state – plus millions more for her foundation. the sultan of brunei has pushed oppressive sharia law, including the punishment of death by stoning for being gay. the government of brunei also stands to be one of the biggest beneficiaries of hillary's trans-pacific partnership, which she would absolutely approve if given the chance.


hillary clinton took up to $25 million from saudi arabia, where being gay is also punishable by death.


hillary took millions from kuwait, qatar, oman and many other countries that horribly abuse women and lgbt citizens.
to cover-up her corrupt dealings, hillary clinton illegally stashed her state department emails on a private server.

her server was easily hacked by foreign governments – perhaps even by her financial backers in communist china – putting all of america in danger.

then there are the 33,000 emails she deleted.

while we may not know what is in those deleted emails, our enemies probably do.

so they probably now have a blackmail file over someone who wants to be president of the united states.

this fact alone disqualifies her from the presidency.

we can't hand over our government to someone whose deepest, darkest secrets may be in the hands of our enemies.

national security is also immigration security – and hillary wants neither.

hillary clinton has put forward the most radical immigration platform in the history of the united states.

she has pledged to grant mass amnesty and in her first 100 days, end virtually all immigration enforcement, and thus create totally open borders in the united states.

the first victims of her radical policies will be poor african-american and hispanic workers who need jobs. they are the ones she will hurt the most.

let me share with you a letter our campaign received from mary ann mendoza.

she lost her amazing son, police sergeant brandon mendoza, after he was killed by an illegal immigrant because of the open borders policies supported by hillary clinton.

sadly, the mendoza family is just one of thousands who have suffered the same fate.

here is an excerpt from mrs. mendoza's letter:

"hillary clinton, who already has the blood of so many on her hands, is now announcing that she is willing to put each and every one of our lives in harms' way – an open door policy to criminals and terrorists to enter our country. hillary is not concerned about you or i, she is only concerned about the power the presidency would bring to her. she needs to go to prison to pay for the crimes she has already committed against this country."

hillary also wants to spend hundreds of billions to resettle middle eastern refugees in the united states, on top of the current record level of immigration.

for the amount of money hillary clinton would like to spend on refugees, we could rebuild every inner city in america.

hillary's wall street immigration agenda will keep immigrant communities poor, and unemployed americans out of work. she can't claim to care about african-american and hispanic workers when she wants to bring in millions of new low-wage workers to compete against them.

here are a few things a trump administration will do for america in the first 100 days:

appoint judges who will uphold the constitution. hillary clinton's radical judges will virtually abolish the 2nd amendment.


change immigration rules to give unemployed americans an opportunity to fill good-paying jobs


stand up to countries that cheat on trade, of which there are many


cancel rules and regulations that send jobs overseas


lift restrictions on energy production


repeal and replace job-killing obamacare -- it is a disaster.


pass massive tax reform to create millions of new jobs.


impose tough new ethics rules to restore dignity to the office of secretary of state.
there is one common theme in all of these reforms.

it's going to be america first.

this is why the stakes in november are so great.

on election day, the politicians stand trial before the people.

the voters are the jury. their ballots are the verdict. we don't need or want another clinton or obama.

come november, the american people will have a chance to issue a verdict on the politicians that have sacrificed their security, betrayed their prosperity, and sold out their country.

they will have a chance to vote for a new agenda with big dreams, bold ideas and enormous possibilities for the american people.

hillary clinton's message is old and tired. her message is that can't change.

my message is that things have to change – and this is our one chance do it. this is our last chance to do it.

americans are the people that tamed the west, that dug out the panama canal, that sent satellites across the solar system that built the great dams, and so much more.

then we started thinking small.

we stopped believing in what america could do, and became reliant on other countries, other people, and other institutions.

we lost our sense of purpose, and daring.

but that's not who we are.

come this november, we can bring america back – bigger and better, and stronger than ever.

we will build the greatest infrastructure on the planet earth – the roads and railways and airports of tomorrow.

our military will have the best technology and finest equipment – we will bring it back all the way.

massive new factories will come roaring into our country – breathing life and hope into our communities.

inner cities, which have been horribly abused by hillary clinton and the democrat party, will finally be rebuilt.

construction is what i know -- nobody knows it better.

the real wages for our workers have not been raised for 18 years -- but these wages will start going up, along with the new jobs. hillary's massive taxation, regulation and open borders will destroy jobs and drive down wages for everyone.

we are also going to be supporting our police and law enforcement -- we can never forget the great job they do.

i am also going to appoint great supreme court justices.

our country is going to start working again.

people are going to start working again.

parents are going to start dreaming big for their children again – including parents in our inner cities.

americans are going to start believing in the future or our country.

we are going to make america rich again.

we are going to make america safe again.

we are going to make america great again – and great again for everyone.thank you.

i'd like to thank chairman jeff miller for his leadership on behalf of those who have served this country in military uniform, and for working with our campaign on developing real solutions for our great veterans.

before going further today, however, i would first like to address the contributions of another group who serve this country in uniform: the men and women in blue.

our police officers rush into danger every day to protect our communities, and they often do it thanklessly and under relentless criticism.

they save thousands of lives every year, perform countless public services every day, and yet their names will likely never appear in a single headline or media report.

but i want our nation's police to know, that we thank you, and we support you, and we will always stand with you.

the attack on our dallas police is an attack on our country.

our whole nation is in mourning, and will be for a very long time.

yet, we've also seen increasing threats against our police and a substantial rise in the number of officers killed in the line of duty.

america's police and law enforcement personnel are what separates civilization from total chaos – and the destruction of our country as we know it.

we must remember, the police are needed the most where crime is the highest. politicians and activists who seek to remove police or policing from a community are hurting the poorest and most vulnerable americans.

it is time for the hostility against our police, and against all members of law enforcement, to end – and to end right now.

we went through an ugly chapter in our history, during vietnam, when our troops became the victims of harassment and political agendas. for too many police today, that is their daily reality.

at the same time, the tragic deaths in louisiana and minnesota make clear the work that must be done to ensure every american feels that their safety is protected. we were all disturbed by the images we saw.

we must discuss, as well, the ongoing catastrophe of crime in our inner cities. according to the chicago tribune, there has already been more than 2,000 shooting victims in chicago this year alone. this epidemic of violence destroys lives, destroys communities, and destroys opportunity for young americans.

violent crime has increased in cities across america. the new york times described "a startling rise in murders," in our major cities.

brutal drug cartels are spreading their reach into virginia and maryland.

too many americans are trapped in fear, violence and poverty.

our inner cities have been left behind, and i am going to fight to make sure every citizen of this country has a safe home, safe school and safe community.

we must maintain law and order at the highest level or we will cease to have a country.

i am the law and order candidate.

hillary clinton, on the other hand, is weak, ineffective, pandering, and, as proven by her recent email scandal, which was an embarrassment not only to her, but to the nation as a whole, she is either a liar or grossly incompetent.

personally, i think she is both.

not only am i the law and order candidate, but i am also the candidate of compassion. but you can't have true compassion without providing safety for the citizens of the united states. every kid in america should be able to securely walk the streets in their own neighborhood.

everyone will be protected equally and treated justly, without prejudice.

we will be tough, we will be smart, we will be fair – and we will protect all americans.

without safety, we have nothing!

it is the job of the next president to make america safe again — for everyone.

that promise of protection must include taking care of every last veteran, which was going to be the sole topic of today's speech prior to the attack in dallas.

the men and women who have served in our armed forces represent the very best of america.

now is the time to follow their example of unity, public service and selfless devotion to our country.

we made a promise to these heroes. you defend america, and america will defend you.

but that promise has been broken by our politicians, like so many other promises our country has made – not only to its veterans, but to its citizens as a whole.

president obama has allowed our veterans affairs health care system to deny help and support to those who deserve it most.

hillary clinton recently said of the va scandal that "it's not been as widespread as it has been made out to be."

she actually thinks that the veterans health administration is well run – that's because she has been part of the rigged system.

perhaps it is easy for politicians to lose touch with reality when they are being paid millions of dollars to read speeches to wall street executives – instead of spending time with real people in real pain.

the disconnect in america is deep.

there are two americas: the ruling class, and the groups it favors, and then everyone else.

the va scandals that have occurred on this administration's watch are widespread and inexcusable.

an internal memo from a senior va official describes "lawlessness and chaos," at the veterans health administration, including the payments of $6 billion a year in violation of federal contracting rules.

the memo also says they "waste millions of dollars by paying excessive prices due to breaches of federal laws" and warns that "these unlawful acts may potentially result in serious harm or death to america's veterans."

even the white house's own deputy chief of staff described "significant and chronic systemic failures," in veterans affairs, including "a corrosive culture that has led to personnel problems across the department," with "poor management," and "a history of retaliation toward employees raising issues." he said there is a "lack of accountability across all grade levels."

here are just a few examples:

--forty veterans died waiting for care in phoenix.

--forty different va facilities nationwide were found to be manipulating and falsifying wait times.

--a va employee who was involved in an armed robbery was kept on staff, as was a convicted sex offender.

--the va spent $8 million on solar panels for a facility knowing they would likely need to be torn down.

--the st. cloud, minn. va built a $2.3 million wind turbine in april 2011 that hasn't supplied power since 2012.

can you imagine the waste and corruption we'll find when we begin a full investigation in january of 2017?

most of those responsible have still not been held to account.

fixing this corruption will be one of my highest priorities – and it will happen. it will be fixed.

that begins with a simple promise: every veteran will get timely access to top-quality care

veterans should be guaranteed the right to choose their doctor and clinics, whether at a va facility or at a private medical center.

we must extend this right to all veterans– not just those who can't get an appointment in 30 days, or who live more than 40 miles from a va hospital, which is the current policy.

this promise includes guaranteed access to the best available healthcare services for our female veterans.

we must also do more to help our veterans find jobs

every year, large corporations bring in many thousands of low-wage workers from overseas, and across the border, to fill jobs that could easily be filled by our veterans.

veterans should come first in the country they fought to protect, and under a trump administration they will -- america first, veterans first.

veterans' health care must also include the best mental health care.

a shocking 20 veterans are committing suicide each day, especially our older veterans.

this is a national tragedy.

the evidence shows that if veterans are in the system, receiving care, they are much less likely to take their own lives than veterans outside the system.

that is why we must increase the number of mental health care professionals inside the va – while ensuring that veterans can access private mental health care as well.

america must take action to improve mental health services for the country at large. this includes expanding the number of facilities, integrating primary care and mental care professionals, reforming confinement rules, and making it easier for family members who see warning signs to get their loved ones the care they need – especially in emergencies.

one of the most important reforms we can make is accountability

right now, when va employees fail our veterans, you can't discipline them.

that's because of outdated civil service rules in need of reform.

in fact, employees are given bonuses after making bad decisions.

in 2014, the va awarded $142 million in bonuses to its employees, including bonuses to the executives who oversaw construction of the denver va hospital that was more than $1 billion over budget.

two other va executives even abused their authority to obtain $400,000 in relocation benefits.

it doesn't have to be this way.

as veteran affairs chairman jeff miller said: "the va is not sacred. the veteran is."

here is my 10 step plan to ensure quality, timely care for every veteran in america:

one:

i will appoint a secretary of veterans affairs who will make it his or her personal mission to clean up the va.

the secretary's sole mandate will be to serve our veterans – not bureaucrats, not politicians, but veterans. amazingly, president obama's va secretary recently downplayed concerns about waiting times by saying that people also wait in line at disneyland.

two:

i am going to use every lawful authority to remove and discipline federal employees or managers who fail our veterans or breach the public trust.

three:

i am going to ask congress to pass legislation that ensures the secretary of veterans affairs has the authority to remove or discipline any employee who risks the health, safety or well-being of any veteran.

four:

i am going to appoint a commission to investigate all the wrongdoing at the va and then present those findings to congress as the basis for bold legislative reform.

five:

i am going to make sure the honest and dedicated people in the va have their jobs protected, and are put in line for promotions.

six:

i will create a private white house hotline – that is answered by a real person 24 hours a day – to ensure that no valid complaint about va wrongdoing falls through the cracks.

i will instruct my staff that if a valid complaint is not addressed that the issue be brought directly to me, and i will pick up the phone and fix it myself, if need be.

that's a promise.

seven:

we are going to stop giving bonuses to people for wasting money, and start giving bonuses to people for improving service, saving lives and cutting waste.

if an employee finds a smart way to save a large amount of money that also creates better outcomes for our veterans, then a small, responsible portion of the money saved will be given as a one-time bonus and the rest will be returned to taxpayers.

eight:

we are going to reform our visa programs to ensure american veterans are in the front, not back, of the line.

nine:

we are going to increase the number of mental health care professionals, and increase outreach to veterans outside of the system.

ten:

we are going to ensure every veteran in america has the choice to seek care at the va, or to seek private medical care paid for by our government.

never again will we allow a veteran to suffer or die waiting for the care they so richly deserve.

we need to clean out the corruption in government, and hillary clinton will never be able to do it

she is incompetent, and has proven that time and time again.

crooked hillary clinton is the secretary of the status quo – and wherever hillary clinton goes, corruption and scandal follow.

our country needs change, and she will never give us change.

the fact is, she helped create our rigged system.

hillary clinton's america is a country where the elite get one standard of treatment and everybody else gets second-class treatment.

the rigged system refused to prosecute her for conduct that put all of america at risk.

hillary clinton went to great lengths to create a private email server and to bypass government security in order to keep her emails from being read by the public and by federal officials.

in other words, she was willing to risk our foreign enemies reading her emails as long as the voting american public could not.

her conduct was willful, intentional, and unlawful – and her repeated false statements about her conduct prove that she was fully aware of her guilt.

this was not just extreme carelessness with classified material – which is still totally disqualifying. this is calculated, deliberate, premeditated misconduct – followed by a cover-up that included false statements and lies to congress, the media and the american people.

in fact, when the fbi interviewed her for only 3 hours during the 4th of july weekend, her interview was not recorded, and she was, amazingly, not even put under oath.

she carried out her dangerous email scheme at the same time as her bad judgement and enthusiasm for regime change was unleashing isis across the world.

afterwards, as a further demonstration of guilt, hillary clinton erased more than thirty thousand emails as part of the cover-up.

the fact that she got away with all of this could be her single most impressive accomplishment.

when thinking about her e-mail destruction, let's not forget: many foreign and corporate entities, and other special interests, with business before hillary clinton's state department were making massive financial contributions. these contributions were made to both the clinton foundation and to the clintons directly.

if elected, hillary clinton would become the first president of the united states who wouldn't be able to pass a background check.

just look at what the fbi director said about her – her misconduct is a disgrace and embarrassment to our country.

clearly, hillary clinton thinks she is above the law. come november, the american people will show her that she is not.

the decades of decay, division and decline will come to an end.

the years of american greatness will return.

we are going to become, for the first time in a long time, one united country.

we are going to make american great again – and safe again – for all americans.

we will dream big and bold and daring things once more.

let me conclude by paying tribute to every single american hero who has served this country, and most especially those who gave the ultimate sacrifice.

our debt to them is eternal and everlasting.

we are going to fight for our military and our law enforcement personnel the same way they have fought for us.

we will be a safe, strong, and proud country once again.

thank you.
thank you, everybody. great honor. great honor, thank you. this is a wonderful day. aww.  wow.  on a saturday morning yet. isn't that nice? thank you, all. and we're going to have an incredible convention. it's really going well. we're going to have an incredible convention. and we're going to get things solved, and we're going to do lots of wonderful things for our country, most importantly.

so i'm here today to introduce the man who will be my partner in this campaign, and the white house, to fix our rigged system -- we are in a rigged, rigged system -- and to make america safe again and to make america great again.

i want to also address the islamic terror attack in france. we've witnessed horror beyond belief, no matter where you look. and now it's happening more and more. and it's never going to stop.

we need new leadership. we need new thinking. we need strength. we need in our country law and order. and if i'm elected president, that will happen.

i want to express our unyielding support for the people of france, and we mourn their loss as a nation.

and as far as turkey is concerned, so many friends in turkey, great people, amazing people. we wish them well. it looks like they're resolving the difficulty, but we wish them well. a lot of -- a lot of anguish last night, but hopefully it'll all work out.

now, as, hopefully, the next president of the united states, i want to refer back to what's happened over the years. the middle east today is more unstable than ever before. never been like this. out of control. after four years of clinton, who really led the way and led obama down a horrible path, because i don't even think he could have made these decisions so badly, she led him right down a horrible path. he didn't know what he was doing.

iraq, syria, all into chaos. and iran is on a path to nuclear weapons. and on top of that, we gave them back $150 billion, and we didn't get our hostages until the end. now we're seeing unrest in turkey, a further demonstration of the failures of obama-clinton. you just have to look, every single thing they touched has turned to horrible, horrible, death-defying problems.

we also need to bring back in this country -- because we see what happened -- our industry, our manufacturing, our jobs. they've been taken away, like we're babies. taken away. and we're going to bring them back.

i found the leader who will help us deliver a safe society and a prosperous -- really prosperous society for all americans. indiana governor mike pence was my first choice. i've admired the work he's done, especially in the state of indiana. and i'm going to go over some of those accomplishments in just a minute.

but i also admire the fact that he fights for the people, and he's going to fight for you. he is a solid, solid person.

governor pence served indiana with distinction in congress. he rose to leadership and served as the chairman of the entire house republican conference. number one. he's really got the skills of a highly talented executive, leading the state of indiana to jobs, growth, and opportunity, in spite of the relentless obstacles put in his way and every state's way by the obama administration. it's horrible out there. high taxes and regulations. and it's out of control.

mike pence is a man of honor, character, and honesty. we know that. hillary clinton is the embodiment of corruption. she's a corrupt person. what she's done with her e-mails, what she's done with so many things, and i see the ads up all the time, the ads. she's totally bought and paid for by wall street, the special interests, the lobbyists, 100 percent. she's crooked hillary.

and i think that, while she got away with murder, in fact, i think it might be her greatest accomplishment, escaping the recent scandal, and her lies, and the loss of 33,000 e-mails -- but it wasn't a loss, she discarded -- that in itself is a major crime. other people have been paying tremendous prices for what they've done, which is peanuts compared to what happened with hillary clinton.

thirty-three thousand e-mails are missing, and that's ok? didn't give them to the fbi? didn't give them to the attorney general, and that's ok? wipes her server clean, that's ok? these are crimes. these are crimes. and how she got away with it, i think i understand it, but i think a lot of people don't.

but i do believe, while she didn't pay the price she should have paid, she's going to pay that price when november 8th rolls around. she's going to pay it at the polls. i believe that.

on top of everything else, hillary made $21.6 million giving speeches to special interests in a short period of time. she's totally owned by wall street. we believe in americanism; she believes in globalism. and it's not that she believes in it. the people that give her all of this money believe in it. and she'll believe in whatever they want her to believe. believe me. that's it.

what a difference between crooked hillary clinton and mike pence.

mike pence will never be afraid to speak the name of our enemy: radical islam. radical islamic terrorism. you saw it the other day with the truck screaming out the window. you heard what he was screaming out the window. you saw it in san bernardino. you saw it at the world trade center. you saw it in orlando. how horrible was that? you saw it in paris. you see it all over.

and hillary is a weak person. we are the law and order candidates, and we're the law and order party. we're going to change things around. there's going to be respect again for law and order.

hillary clinton's foreign policy helped launch isis. you know, she's talking -- i see the ads she puts on. if i make one statement, which is fine, she'll take that statement and put on a totally dishonest ad, because she's got a lot of money because it's given to her by the lobbyists and by the special interests. got a lot of money.

but i see the ads on foreign policy. she's talking about  doesn't have foreign policy experience. of course not. i've been a very, very, very successful businessperson. i mean -- but -- but if you look at my calls, i said, don't go into iraq. nobody cared, because i was a businessperson. i was a civilian. take the oil. many, many calls i've made.

you take a look. i said that in scotland and in the u.k., that was going to happen. i was the one that predicted it. and everybody said, he's wrong, he's wrong. president obama said, if it happens, they're going to get to the back of the line, which probably is one of the reasons they lost, because i consider it a win. i think it was a win for them, actually, because they don't want to be told what to do. and they don't want to be told that when people pour into the country, they have to take them even if they're not qualified, even if they don't have paperwork, even if they have no idea where they come from.

and i said that brexit's going to happen. i said that they are going to break away. and everybody laughed at me. and the odds were 20 percent. and then when it happened, she took an ad saying, oh,  said this or that, but i'm the one that said it was going to happen. and some of the more fair reporters -- about 30 percent of them -- said he was right. i appreciate that. seventy percent didn't, so that's ok.

so mike pence will never be afraid to speak the name of our enemy. so important. now, i think if you look at one of the big reasons that i chose mike -- and one of the reasons is party unity, i have to be honest. so many people have said party unity. because i'm an outsider. i want to be an outsider. i think it's one of the reasons i won in landslides. i won in landslides. this wasn't close. this wasn't close.

no, this wasn't close. this was -- in the history of the republican party, history, with 17 people running, you have to understand, other people ran against one, two, and three. there were 17. we got -- i say we, because i'm the messenger, i'm a messenger -- i'm doing a good job, but i'm a messenger -- we got almost 14 million votes. that's more than any other person in the history of the republican party in the primary system running for president.

think of it. that's more than ronald reagan, who we love. that's more than richard nixon. it's more than dwight d. eisenhower. you know, he won the second world war, in all fairness. pretty good. it's more than the bushes.

but i mean by a lot. i don't mean by a little. but that's with 17 people. people don't over-say that. that means our message is unbelievable. and i want to thank all of the loyal people -- because i have such loyal, unbelievable people, and they displayed that just yesterday in cleveland, where it's going to be so amazing.

but they displayed it. it was on display, where we had this group of people, who -- many of whom i've known, and i won't say, because for party unity, i'll say they're wonderful people, ok? never trump, they said, never trump, never trump. oh, we're going to win. they got crushed. and they got crushed immediately, because people want what we're saying to happen.

they're tired of a country that has horrible trade deals, that has no borders, that has taxes that are through the roof, highest taxed nation just about in the world, that has regulations that don't allow you to start a business and destroy your business if you do start -- and, by the way, speaking of destroying businesses, we're going to take care of the miners and we're going to take care of the steelworkers. we're going to put 'em back to work.

so they're very tired of it. but i want to thank all of those people that – delegates-- that were on the different committees, because, boy, was that something. did we show them something. and unfortunately, the vote was very late. but essentially, we had 112-12. this was the vote that was going to put it onto the floor and we're going to have a big fight. we're not going to have a fight. people agree with what we've -- they want the wall. they want the borders. they want these things to happen.

and what we're doing...

and what we're doing that i'm so proud of, so proud -- and nobody else would even think about doing it -- i fought very hard for it. we'll call it the johnson amendment, where he took away from the evangelicals -- and i want to thank the evangelicals, because without the evangelicals, i could not have won this nomination. the evangelicals have been unbelievable. i dominated with the evangelicals. a lot of people were surprised. they say he's not perfect. but you know what? they know i'm going to get the job done, and they're really smart.

and i said -- and i said for the evangelicals, that we're going to do something that nobody's even tried to do. you have the johnson amendment passed by lyndon johnson and his group. and he was a powerful president. he knew how to get things done. he got bogged down in a war that was a disaster and it destroyed him. but he was a powerful president.

and we call it the johnson amendment, where you are just absolutely shunned if you're evangelical, if you want to talk religion, you lose your tax-exempt status. we put into the platform, we're going to get rid of that horrible johnson amendment. and we're going to let evangelicals, we're going to let christians and jews and people of religion talk without being afraid to talk.

i saw this. i had so many great leaders so many times up to my office, the top -- the absolute top evangelical leaders, christian leaders, jewish leaders, believe it or not, some muslim leaders -- people are going to be surprised to hear that -- i had the top leaders up to my office, and i said, why is it that you're so powerful as an individual, and yet when you get out there, you're sort of timid?

and they didn't know how to answer the question. and it took two, three meetings before i figured it out. one great, great gentleman that everybody knows, but whose name i will not reveal, said, mr. trump, we live in fear in our churches and our synagogues. we live in fear that we're going to lose our tax-exempt status if we say anything that's even slightly political.

and i looked out the window. i was in trump tower, and i pointed to people walking down the street. i said, well, they have the right to speak, but you don't. that means they're more powerful than you are. we have to do something about it. how did it start? how did it start?

and they said, it started because of lyndon johnson. and he actually had a problem in texas with a certain religious leader. and he did this, and he got it done. and we're going to undo it, so that religious leaders in this country, and those unbelievable people--and not because they backed me in such large numbers-- but so that religion can again have a voice, because religion's voice has been taken away. and we're going to change that. ok? all right.

back to mike pence. so one of the primary reasons i chose mike was i looked at indiana, and i won indiana big. remember, indiana was going to be the firewall. that's where trump was going down -- they agreed i'd win new york, i'd win pennsylvania, i'd win all these places. but indiana was going to be the firewall.

so i got to study indiana, and i got to study new york and a lot of other places, and i saw how nafta, signed by bill clinton, has drained our manufacturing jobs, just drained us like we've never been drained before. nafta, again, signed by bill clinton. nafta is the worst economic deal in the history of our country. manufacturing down in some states 55, 60 percent. it's a horror show, moving to mexico, moving to other places.

i have a friend who's a great builder. what he builds is plants. that's all he does, is build plants. he doesn't build buildings. he doesn't -- he builds plants. it's the biggest in the world, from what i hear.

i said, how's business? i was with him the other day. how's business? he goes unbelievable. i said, really, wow, i'm surprised. why is it unbelievable? because i think of him as building in this country. he says, donald, what we're doing in mexico, you won't believe. i said, what do you mean? he said, we're building plants in mexico the likes of which we've never seen.

i said, what about this country? not much. not much. that's the expression. he said exactly that. not much. i said, but mexico? he said, you've never seen anything like it. it's incredible.

folks, that's going to stop. we're going to go reverse it. we're going to bring our jobs back to this country. we can't be the stupid people anymore. ok?

and he was better than a pollster. he's better than a consultant. i would say, how are we doing? and you get a big report that costs you millions of dollars. doesn't cost me millions. me, i give them $10,000, ok?

it costs other people millions. it costs other campaigns millions to get a report. every time they get a report, it's millions. but i'll tell you what, a guy like this is better than anybody you can hire to do a report. and he said it. he didn't say it from the standpoint of he's upset about it. just fact. how are we doing? unbelievable in mexico. in fact, he actually said, i've never, ever seen anything like it.

and if you look, ford is building massive plants there instead of michigan. we want them to build them in michigan. they're going to build them in michigan. and you know that i know how to do that. so easy. so easy.

but they're not going to do and they're not going to take advantage of us without retribution. there are consequences when you fire thousands of people and move to another country and then think you're going to you're your product and sell it in here. there are consequences. and those consequences are going to keep companies in our country. it's very simple. and everybody here knows what the consequences are, but i won't say that because i'm much more interested right now in mike.

indiana's unemployment rate -- and this is the primary reason i wanted mike, other than he looks very good, other than he's got an incredible family, incredible wife and family -- karen is amazing.

incredible family. highly respected. expected to go for another four years. he would have won, i think, very easily in indiana. indiana, their unemployment rate has fallen. when he was there, when he started, 8.4 percent when he was governor, when he took over, to less than 5 percent in may of 2016. since january 2013, indiana's labor force has increased by more than 186,000 jobs. you have to understand, i've gone around to all these states. i've gone to all of them. and every time, i have statisticians. i say give me the stats on a state.

and it's always bad, down, down, down. down 40 percent, 50 percent, 60 percent in some cases. here's somebody where it's gone up. private sector job growth is up by more than 147,000 jobs since 2013. that's like very unusual.

governor pence balanced the budget. can you imagine a balanced budget? our budget's so out of whack in this country, we don't know what we're doing. we're going to owe very soon $21 trillion. he balanced the budget. they don't know what that means. governor pence balanced the budget, produced a surplus, and maintains a $2 billion reserve fund in the state of indiana.

it's also rated triple-a, their bonds are rated triple-a. very few states have that. triple-a. the best. that's as good as you can get, whether you're a company, a state, triple-a.

indiana was recently recognized by chief executive magazine as the number-one state in the midwest for business. number one. and it's not even close. there are approximately 34,000 fewer hoosiers on unemployment insurance now than there were when mike pence took office. so you have fewer hoosiers, fewer people from indiana.

and besides that, bobby knight, my friend, who really did help me. i mean, if you want a reference, bobby knight in indiana, we love bobby knight. but he agrees with everything i'm saying. he loves the governor.

indiana has the second-lowest unemployment rate in the nation, for veterans, where nobody's fighting for the veterans like i'm fighting for the veterans, the veterans have been left behind.

if you remember a few months ago, hillary clinton said the, really -- they're doing much better, the v.a. is much better. they're doing a much better job than people give it credit for. people are dying on line waiting for five, six days for doctors. people are dying on -- they can't even see a doctor. it's a scandal.

take a look at what's happening with the v.a. in arizona. take a look at what's happening with -- you know, just the veterans administration hospitals. it's a scandal. it's corrupt. it's incompetent. it's a scandal. and hillary clinton thought it was just fine. and, boy, am i going to win big with the veterans. i mean, we know that for a fact.

so it's now 2.4 percent for veterans. in 2013, when mike pence took office, the rate for veterans was 6.7 percent. it was 31st in the nation, one of the bad ones, and now it's almost the best. got 'em jobs. got 'em jobs.

indianapolis is ranked second in top 10 metro areas for young college graduates. that's a great thing. they're going to stay there. that's a great thing. and mike worked hard on that. he was telling me, that was not easy.

under governor pence's leadership, indiana enacted the largest k-12 education funding increase in the state's history. so you're balancing budgets, and yet you're giving more money to education. isn't that a great thing?

indiana has just about the largest school choice program in america. school choice is where it's at, folks. you want to get your schools better, you gotta get rid of common core fast.

governor pence enacted the largest income tax cut in the state's history. think of that. we're cutting taxes and balancing budgets. and along with corporate tax reform, just about number one in the country. cnbc ranked indiana first in the nation for its infrastructure.

so with all of these cuts and all of these balancing budgets, we're spending more money on education, and the infrastructure is kept up. that had so much -- look, as a builder, nobody in the history of this country has ever known so much about infrastructure as . i build infrastructure. do i know how to build a wall? do i know how to build infrastructure?

you know, it's very interesting. we're building -- we're building -- i won -- the -- which is pretty amazing with the obama administration, but i won the right to have the old post office building on pennsylvania avenue, right near the white house, and it's an amazing -- probably the best location, one of the most sought after projects in the history of the gsa, general services. and i really like what's happened. we're going to have an opening very soon. ivanka and eric and don did a fantastic job on it.

but i thought the other day, i was going over the numbers, we're under budget and about a year -- actually more than a year – but we're a year ahead of schedule, and we're under budget substantially. and the quality of the work is even better than we originally were going to do.

and when i explained to a government representative that we're under budget and ahead of schedule, they almost fell off, because they've never heard those words before. they've never heard them.

so when i see what happened to indiana, which was having tremendous problems, when i see what happened to indiana under mike's work -- also his predecessor did a great job, by the way, great job, who's now at duke -- who's now at purdue -- when i see what happened with respect to the numbers, the state, and everything else, that, to me, was probably the single most important point, because it's something that hasn't happened -- almost has not happened in this whole country.

the turnaround and the strength of indiana has been incredible, and i learned that when i campaigned there. and i learned that when i won that state in a landslide. and i learned that when governor pence, under tremendous pressure from establishment people, endorsed somebody else, but it was more of an endorsement for me, if you remember. he talked about trump, then he talked about ted -- who's a good guy, by the way, who's going to be speaking at the convention, ted cruz, good guy -- but he talked about trump, ted, then he went back to trump. i said, who did he endorse?

so even though he was under pressure, because i'm so, you know, outside of the establishment, it was the single greatest non-endorsement i've ever had in my life, ok? i will tell you.

so with that, i would like to introduce a man who i truly believe will be outstanding in every way and will be the next vice president of the united states, governor mike pence. thank you. thank you, everybody. thank you. friends, delegates and fellow americans: i humbly and gratefully accept your nomination for the presidency of the united states.

u.s.a.! u.s.a.! u.s.a.!

together, we will lead our party back to the white house, and we will lead our country back to safety, prosperity, and peace. we will be a country of generosity and warmth. but we will also be a country of law and order.

our convention occurs at a moment of crisis for our nation. the attacks on our police, and the terrorism in our cities, threaten our very way of life. any politician who does not grasp this danger is not fit to lead our country.

americans watching this address tonight have seen the recent images of violence in our streets and the chaos in our communities. many have witnessed this violence personally, some have even been its victims.

i have a message for all of you: the crime and violence that today afflicts our nation will soon – and i mean very soon – come to an end.

beginning on january 20th of 2017, safety will be restored.

the most basic duty of government is to defend the lives of its own citizens. any government that fails to do so is a government unworthy to lead.

it is finally time for a straightforward assessment of the state of our nation.

i will present the facts plainly and honestly. we cannot afford to be so politically correct anymore.

so if you want to hear the corporate spin, the carefully-crafted lies, and the media myths the democrats are holding their convention next week. go there.

but here, at our convention, there will be no lies. we will honor the american people with the truth, and nothing else.

these are the facts:

decades of progress made in bringing down crime are now being reversed by this administration's rollback of criminal enforcement.

homicides last year increased by 17 percent in america's fifty largest cities. that's the largest increase in 25 years. in our nation's capital, killings have risen by 50 percent. they are up nearly 60 percent in nearby baltimore.

in the president's hometown of chicago, more than 2,000 people have been the victim of shootings this year alone. and almost 4,000 have been killed in the chicago area since he took office.

the number of police officers killed in the line of duty has risen by almost 50 percent compared to this point last year. nearly 180,000 illegal immigrants with criminal records, ordered deported from our country, are tonight roaming free to threaten peaceful citizens.

the number of new illegal immigrant families who have crossed the border so far this year already exceeds the entire total from 2015. they are being released by the tens of thousands into our communities with no regard for the impact on public safety or resources.

one such border-crosser was released and made his way to nebraska. there, he ended the life of an innocent young girl named sarah root. she was 21 years-old, and was killed the day after graduating from college with a 4.0 grade point average. number one in her class. her killer was then released a second time, and he is now a fugitive from the law.

i've met sarah's beautiful family. but to this administration, their amazing daughter was just one more american life that wasn't worth protecting. no more. one more child to sacrifice on the order and on the altar of open borders. what about our economy?

again, i will tell you the plain facts that have been edited out of your nightly news and your morning newspaper: nearly four in 10 african-american children are living in poverty, while 58% of african american youth are now not employed. 2 million more latinos are in poverty today than when president obama took his oath of office less than eight years ago. another 14 million people have left the workforce entirely.

household incomes are down more than $4,000 since the year 2000. our trade deficit in goods -- think of this -- our trade deficit reached nearly $800 billion last year alone. we're going to fix that.

the budget is no better.

president obama has doubled our national debt to more than $19 trillion, and growing. and yet, what do we have to show for it? our roads and bridges are falling apart, our airports are third world condition, and forty-three million americans are on food stamps.

now let us consider the state of affairs abroad.

not only have our citizens endured domestic disaster, but they have lived through one international humiliation after another. one after another. we all remember the images of our sailors being forced to their knees by their iranian captors at gunpoint.

this was just prior to the signing of the iran deal, which gave back to iran $150 billion and gave us absoltely nothing – it will go down in history as one of the worst deals ever negotiated. another humiliation came when president obama drew a red line in syria – and the whole world knew it meant absolutely nothing.

in libya, our consulate – the symbol of american prestige around the globe – was brought down in flames. america is far less safe – and the world is far less stable – than when obama made the decision to put hillary clinton in charge of america's foreign policy.

let's defeat her in november, ok.

i am certain it is a decision president obama truly regrets. her bad instincts and her bad judgment – something pointed out by bernie sanders – are what caused so many of the disasters unfolding today. let's review the record.

in 2009, pre-hillary, isis was not even on the map.libya was stable. egypt was peaceful. iraq was seeing a big, big reduction in violence. iran was being choked by sanctions. syria was somewhat under control.

after four years of hillary clinton, what do we have? isis has spread across the region, and the world. libya is in ruins, and our ambassador and his staff were left helpless to die at the hands of savage killers. egypt was turned over to the radical muslim brotherhood, forcing the military to retake control. iraq is in chaos. iran is on the path to nuclear weapons. syria is engulfed in a civil war and a refugee crisis now threatens the west. after fifteen years of wars in the middle east, after trillions of dollars spent and thousands of lives lost, the situation is worse than it has ever been before.

this is the legacy of hillary clinton: death, destruction, terrorism, and weakness.

but hillary clinton's legacy does not have to be america's legacy. the problems we face now – poverty and violence at home, war and destruction abroad – will last only as long as we continue relying on the same politicians who created them in the first place. a change in leadership is required to produce a change in outcomes. tonight, i will share with you my plan of action for america.

the most important difference between our plan and that of our opponents, is that our plan will put america first. americanism, not globalism, will be our credo. as long as we are led by politicians who will not put america first, then we can be assured that other nations will not treat america with respect, the respect we deserve.

the american people will come first once again. my plan will begin with safety at home – which means safe neighborhoods, secure borders, and protection from terrorism. there can be no prosperity without law and order. on the economy, i will outline reforms to add millions of new jobs and trillions in new wealth that can be used to rebuild america.

a number of these reforms that i will outline tonight will be opposed by some of our nation's most powerful special interests. that is because these interests have rigged our political and economic system for their exclusive benefit. believe me, it's for their benefit.

big business, elite media and major donors are lining up behind the campaign of my opponent because they know she will keep our rigged system in place. they are throwing money at her because they have total control over every single thing she does. she is their puppet, and they pull the strings.

that is why hillary clinton's message is that things will never change...never ever. my message is that things have to change – and they have to change right now. every day i wake up determined to deliver for the people i have met all across this nation that have been neglected, ignored, and abandoned.

i have visited the laid-off factory workers, and the communities crushed by our horrible and unfair trade deals. these are the forgotten men and women of our country. and they are forgotten, but they're not going to be forgotten long. people who work hard but no longer have a voice.

i am your voice!

i have embraced crying mothers who have lost their children because our politicians put their personal agendas before the national good.



how great are our police? and how great is cleveland?

i have no patience for injustice, no tolerance for government incompetence, no sympathy for leaders who fail their citizens.

when innocent people suffer, because our political system lacks the will, or the courage, or the basic decency to enforce our laws – or still worse still, has sold out to some corporate lobbyist for cash – i am not able to look the other way, and i won't look the other way.

and when a secretary of state illegally stores her emails on a private server, deletes 33,000 of them so the authorities can't see her crime, puts our country at risk, lies about it in every different form and faces no consequence – i know that corruption has reached a level like never ever before in our country.

when the fbi director says that the secretary of state was "extremely careless" and "negligent," in handling our classified secrets, i also know that these terms are minor compared to what she actually did. they were just used to save her from facing justice for her terrible terrible crimes.

in fact, her single greatest accomplishment may be committing such an egregious crime and getting away with it – especially when others who have done far less, have paid so dearly. when that same secretary of state rakes in millions and millions of dollars trading access and favors to special interests and foreign powers, i know the time for action has come.

i have joined the political arena so that the powerful can no longer beat up on people that cannot defend themselves. nobody knows the system better than me, which is why i alone can fix it. i have seen firsthand how the system is rigged against our citizens, just like it was rigged against bernie sanders – he never had a chance.

but his supporters will join our movement, because we will fix his biggest single issue: trade deals that strip us of our jobs, and strip us of our wealth as a country. millions of democrats will join our movement because we are going to fix the system so it works justly for each and every american. in this cause, i am proud to have at my side the next vice president of the united states: governor mike pence of indiana. and a great guy.

we will bring the same economic success to america that mike brought to indiana, which is amazing. he is a man of character and accomplishment. he is the man for the job. the first task for our new administration will be to liberate our citizens from the crime and terrorism and lawlessness that threatens their communities.

america was shocked to its core when our police officers in dallas were so brutally executed. in the days after dallas, we have seen continued threats and violence against our law enforcement officials. law officers have been shot or killed in recent days in georgia, missouri, wisconsin, kansas, michigan and tennessee.

on sunday, more police were gunned down in baton rouge, louisiana. three were killed, and three were very very badly injured. an attack on law enforcement is an attack on all americans. i have a message to every last person threatening the peace on our streets and the safety of our police: when i take the oath of office next year, i will restore law and order to our country. believe me, believe me.

i will work with, and appoint, the best and prosecutors and law enforcement officials to get the job properly done. in this race for the white house, i am the law and order candidate.

the irresponsible rhetoric of our president, who has used the pulpit of the presidency to divide us by race and color, has made america a more dangerous environment for everyone than frankly i have ever seen and anybody in this room has ever watched or seen.

this administration has failed america's inner cities. remember: it has failed america's inner cities. it's failed them on education. it's failed them on jobs. it's failed them on crime. it's failed them at every level.

when i am president, i will work to ensure that all of our kids are treated equally, and protected equally.

every action i take, i will ask myself: does this make better for young americans in baltimore, in chicago, in detroit, in ferguson who have as much of a right to live out their dreams as any other child america? any other child.

to make life safe in america, we must also address the growing threats we face from outside the country: we are going to defeat the barbarians of isis, and we are going to defeat them fast.

once again, france is the victim of brutal islamic terrorism. men, women and children viciously mowed down. lives ruined. families ripped apart. a nation in mourning.

the damage and devastation that can be inflicted by islamic radicals has been proven over and over – at the world trade center, at an office party in san bernardino, at the boston marathon, and a military recruiting center in chattanooga, tennessee. and many, many other locations.

only weeks ago, in orlando, florida, 49 wonderful americans were savagely murdered by an islamic terrorist. this time, the terrorist targeted lgbtq community – no good and we're going to stop it.

as your president, i will do everything in my power to protect our lgbtq citizens from the violence and oppression of a hateful foreign ideology – beleive me.

and as a republican, it is so nice to hear you cheering for what i just said. thank you.

to protect us from terrorism, we need to focus on three things.

we must have the best intelligence gathering operation in the world. we must abandon the failed policy of nation building and regime change that hillary clinton pushed in iraq, libya, egypt and syria. instead, we must work with all of our allies who share our goal of destroying isis and stamping out islamic terrorism and doing it now, doing it quickly. we're going to win. we're going to win fast.

this includes working with our greatest ally in the region, the state of israel.

recently i have said that nato was obsolete, because it did not properly cover terror, and also, that many of the member countries were not paying their fair share. as usual, the united states has been picking up the cost. shortly thereafter, it was announced that nato will be setting up a new program in order to combat terrorism -- a true step in the right direction.

lastly, and very importantly, we must immediately suspend immigration from any nation that has been compromised by terrorism until such time as proven vetting mechanisms have been put in place. we don't want them in our country.

my opponent has called for a radical 550% increase in syrian -- think of this. think of this. this is not believable, but this is what's happening -- refugees on top of existing massive refugee flows coming into our country under president obama. she proposes this despite the fact that there's no way to screen these refugees in order to find out who they are or where they come from.

i only want to admit individuals into our country who will support our values and love our people. anyone who endorses violence, hatred or oppression is not welcome in our country and never ever will be.

decades of record immigration have produced lower wages and higher unemployment for our citizens, especially for african-american and latino workers. we are going to have an immigration system that works, but one that works for the american people.

on monday, we heard from three parents whose children were killed by illegal immigrants mary ann mendoza, sabine durden, and my friend jamiel shaw. they are just three brave representatives of many thousands who have suffered so gravely. of all my travels in this country, nothing has affected me more deeply than the time i have spent with the mothers and fathers who have lost their children to violence spilling across our border, which we can solve. we have to solve it.

these families have no special interests to represent them. there are no demonstrators to protest on their behalf. my opponent will never meet with them, or share in their pain, believe me. instead, my opponent wants sanctuary cities. but where was sanctuary for kate steinle? where was sanctuary for the children of mary ann, and sabine, and jamiel? where was sanctuary for all the other -- oh, it is so sad to even be talking about it because we can fix this problem so quickly -- americans who have been so brutally murdered, and who have suffered so so horribly?

these wounded american families have been alone. but they are alone no longer. tonight, this candidate and the whole nation stand in their corner to support them, to send them our love, and to pledge in their honor that we will save countless more families from suffering and the same awful fate.

we are going to build a great border wall to stop illegal immigration, to stop the gangs and the violence, and to stop the drugs from pouring into our communities. i have been honored to receive the endorsement of america's border patrol agents, and will work directly with them to protect the integrity of our lawful, lawful, lawful immigration system. lawful.

by ending catch-and-release on the border, we will stop the cycle of human smuggling and violence. illegal border crossings will go down. we will stop it. it won't be happening very much anymore. believe me. peace will be restored. by enforcing the rules for the millions who overstay their visas, our laws will finally receive the respect they deserve.

tonight, i want every american whose demands for immigration security have been denied – and every politician who has denied them – to listen very very closely to the words i am about to say.

on january 20th of 2017, the day i take the oath of office, americans will finally wake up in a country where the laws of the united states are enforced. we are going to be considerate and compassionate to everyone.

but my greatest compassion will be for our own struggling citizens.

u.s.a.! u.s.a.! u.s.a.!

my plan is the exact opposite of the radical and dangerous immigration policy of hillary clinton. americans want relief from uncontrolled immigration. communities want relief.

yet hillary clinton is proposing mass amnesty, mass immigration, and mass lawlessness. her plan will overwhelm your schools and hospitals, further reduce your jobs and wages, and make it harder for recent immigrants to escape the tremendous cycle of poverty that they're going through right now and make it almost impossible to join the middle class.

i have a different vision for our workers. it begins with a new, fair trade policy that protects our jobs and stands up to countries that cheat, of which there are many. it's been a signature message of my campaign from day one, and it will be a signature feature of my presidency from the moment i take the oath of office.

i have made billions of dollars in business making deals – now i'm going to make our country rich again. using the richest people in the world, which our country has, i am going to turn our bad trade agreements into great trade agreements. america has lost nearly-one third of its manufacturing jobs since 1997, following the enactment of disastrous trade deals supported by bill and hillary clinton.

remember, it was bill clinton who signed nafta, one of the worst economic deals ever made by our country -- or, frankly, any other country.

never, ever again.

i am going to bring our jobs back to ohio and pennsylvania and new york and michigan and all of america – and i am not going to let companies move to other countries, firing their employees along the way, without consequences. not going to happen anymore.

my opponent, on the other hand, has supported virtually every trade agreement that has been destroying our middle class. she supported nafta, and she supported china's entrance into the world trade organization – another one of her husband's colossal mistakes and disasters.

she supported the job killing trade deal with south korea. she has supported the trans-pacific partnership. the tpp will not only destroy our manufacturing, but it will make america subject to the rulings of foreign governments. and it's not going to happen. i pledge to never sign any trade agreement that hurts our workers, or that diminishes our freedom and independence. i will never, ever sign bad trade deals. america fist, again! america first! instead, i will make individual deals with individual countries.

no longer will we enter into these massive transactions, with many countries, that are thousands of pages long – and which no one from our country even reads or understands. we are going to enforce all trade violations against any country including through the use of taxes and tariffs, against any country that cheats.

this includes stopping china's outrageous theft of intellectual property, along with their illegal product dumping, and their devastating currency manipulation. they are the greatest that ever came about; they are the greatest currency manipulators ever! our horrible trade agreements with china and many others, will be totally renegotiated. that includes renegotiating nafta to get a much better deal for america – and we'll walk away if we don't get the deal that we want.

we are going to start building and making things again.

next comes the reform of our tax laws, regulations and energy rules. while hillary clinton plans a massive -- and i mean massive -- tax increase, i have proposed the largest tax reduction of any candidate who has declared for the presidential race this year – democrat or republican. middle-income americans and businesses will experience profound relief, and taxes will be greatly simplified for everyone, and i mean everyone.

america is one of the highest-taxed nations in the world. reducing taxes will cause new companies and new jobs to come roaring back into our country. believe me, it will happen, and it will happen fast. then we are going to deal with the issue of regulation, one of the greatest job-killers of them all. excessive regulation is costing our country as much as $2 trillion a year, and we will end it very very quickly. we are going to lift the restrictions on the production of american energy. this will produce more than $20 trillion in job creating economic activity over the next four decades.

my opponent, on the other hand, wants to put the great miners and steel workers of our country out of work and out of business – that will never happen with  as president. our steelworkers and our miners are going back to work again. with these new economic policies, trillions of dollars will start flowing into our country.

this new wealth will improve the quality of life for all americans – we will build the roads, highways, bridges, tunnels, airports, and the railways of tomorrow. this, in turn, will create millions more jobs. we will rescue kids from failing schools by helping their parents send them to a safe school of their choice.

my opponent would rather protect bureaucrats than serve american children. and that's what she's doing, and that's what she's done. we will repeal and replace disastrous obamacare. you will be able to choose your own doctor again. and we will fix tsa at the airports which is a total disaster!

thank you. thank you.

we are going to work with all of our students who are drowning in debt to take the pressure off these young people just starting out their adult lives.

we will completely rebuild our depleted military, and the countries that we protect, at a massive loss, will be asked to pay their fair share.

we will take care of our great veterans like they have never been taken care of before. my just-released ten point plan has received tremendous veteran support. we will guarantee those who serve this country will be able to visit the doctor or hospital of their choice without waiting five days in line and dying.

my opponent dismissed the va scandal as being not widespread – one more sign of how out of touch she really is. we are going to ask every department head in government to provide a list of wasteful spending projects that we can eliminate in my first 100 days. the politicians have talked about it, i'm going to do it.

we are also going to appoint justices to the united states supreme court who will uphold our laws and our constitution.

the replacement for our beloved justice scalia will be a person of similar views and judicial philosophies. very important. this will be one of the most important issues decided by this election. my opponent wants to essentially abolish the 2nd amendment. i, on the other hand, received the early and strong endorsement of the national rifle association and will protect the right of all americans to keep their families safe.

at this moment, i would like to thank the evangelical and religious community because i'll tell you what, the support they have given me, and i'm not sure i totally deserve it has been so amazing and has had such a big reason for me being here tonight. so true. they have so much to contribute to our politics, yet our laws prevent you from speaking your minds from your own pulpits. an amendment, pushed by lyndon johnson, many years ago, threatens religious institutions with a loss of their tax-exempt status if they openly advocate their political views. their voice has been taken away.

i am going to work very hard to repeal that language and protect free speech for all americans. we can accomplish these great things, and so much else – all we need to do is start believing in ourselves and in our country again. start believing. it is time to show the whole world that america is back – bigger, and better and stronger than ever before.

in this journey, i'm so lucky to have at my side my wife melania and my wonderful children, don, ivanka, eric, tiffany, and barron: you will always be my greatest source of pride and joy. and by the way, melania and ivanka -- did they do a job? my dad, fred trump, was the smartest and hardest working man i ever knew. i wonder sometimes what he'd say if he were here to see this and to see me tonight.

it's because of him that i learned, from my youngest age, to respect the dignity of work and the dignity of working people. he was a guy most comfortable in the company of bricklayers, carpenters, and electricians and i have a lot of that in me also. i love those people.

then there's my mother, mary. she was strong, but also warm and fair-minded. she was a truly great mother. she was also one of the most honest and charitable people i have ever known, and a great judge of character. she could pick 'em out from anywhere.

to my sisters mary anne and elizabeth, my brother robert and my late brother fred, i will always give you my love you are most special to me. i have loved my life in business.

but now, my sole and exclusive mission is to go to work for our country – to go to work for all of you. it's time to deliver a victory for the american people. we don't win anymore, but we are going to start winning again. but to do that, we must break free from the petty politics of the past.

america is a nation of believers, dreamers, and strivers that is being led by a group of censors, critics, and cynics.

remember: all of the people telling you that you can't have the country you want, are the same people that wouldn't stand -- i mean, they said trump doesn't have a chance of being here tonight. not a chance! the same people. oh, we love defeating those people, don't we? love it, love it, love it. no longer can we rely on those same people in politics and in the media, who will say anything to keep a rigged system in place. instead, we must choose to believe in america.

history is watching us now.

it's waiting to see if we will rise to the occasion, and if we will show the whole world that america is still free and independent and strong. i'm asking for your support tonight so that i can be your champion in the white house.

my opponent asks her supporters to recite a three-word loyalty pledge. it reads: "i'm with her". i choose to recite a different pledge.

my pledge reads: "i'm with you – the american people."

i am your voice.

so to every parent who dreams for their child, and every child who dreams for their future, i say these words to you tonight: i'm with you, and i will fight for you, and i will win for you.

to all americans tonight, in all our cities and towns, i make this promise:

we will make america strong again.

we will make america proud again.

we will make america safe again.

and we will make america great again.

god bless you, and good night! i love you!: (04:55)
thank you very much everybody. thank you. wow. i will never, ever let you down, that i can tell you. amazing. and i want to thank manchester and new hampshire, they’re very special. you remember those primaries? that primary came around and remember what happened during the primary? trump should come in third or fourth, and we came in easily number one, and that was the beginning. that was an easy one. i want to thank you all. this is incredible and it’s great to be back in a state that i love with thousands of hardworking patriots, who are the heart and soul of america. and that’s what you are.
: (05:53)
we’re actually here today to officially launch our campaign to win the great state of new hampshire in 2020. and i saw some fake polls put out by the fake news media, and it said that i’m tied with three of the other candidates, the democrats, i’m tied in new hampshire. i don’t think so. one of them has a rally, he’s got 100 people. so this holds 12,000 we’re full. and we could fill it up four times at least. we could fill it up four times. but i just want to thank you all. i just think it’s going to be a tremendous four years. we’re going to have a tremendous four years. can you believe it? we only have a little more than a year to go, where it all started, right? the greatest political movement in the history of our country.
: (07:08)
and even though we had fake witch hunts on our back and all the other things that we had to go through, we have taken this big beautiful ship, and it’s being turned around very quickly. three years ago, we campaigned across the country on a pledge to make america great again. and that’s exactly what we’ve done. i think we can honestly say it’s the greatest slogan in the history of politics in america. make america great again. so if you don’t mind, the other candidates go, they spend millions and millions of dollars on this question that i’m going to ask you. they spend millions. you remember the first slogan from our opponent? that’s right, neither do i. neither does anybody. nobody remembers. the only thing i remember is the first night i went out after i heard it and i said, see, it’s all about her. and they immediately changed it after spending like a million dollars. it’s all about her. that didn’t work out too well. that slogan wasn’t too good. so we have to do this. we have to make a decision.
: (08:44)
do you give up the greatest slogan in the history of politics in our country? make america great again, right? do we give up make america great again for a new slogan, because look, our country is doing great. we are doing very well with china despite the fact that they want to have you believe in the contrary. all you have to do is say china, how you doing? they’re not too happy, they’re not too happy. they’re losing millions of jobs. the tariffs are working, and they’re eating the tariffs by the way. there’s no price increase. you know, you gotta talk to these people. the fake news. but do we give up?
: (09:36)
and by the way, the biggest beneficiary, you know who have been great? our great farmers have been so incredible because they’ve been targeted by china, and frankly they’ve been targeted for a long time, including by incompetent politicians that have run this country for a long time. so we’re making up for a lot of lost ground. but do we give up make america great for keep america great? keep america great. okay, you ready? ready? i love this because it’s free. and we have all the time in the world, right? is there anything better than a trump rally? what about a sleepy joe biden rally? well, he’s made some beauties. i sort of hope it’s him. i don’t mind any of them. you got pocahontas is rising. we got kamala. kamala is falling. you got beto. beto is like gone. all right, we’ll see what happens. whoever it is, i don’t know that it matters, but whoever it is different, different people. but i don’t know, i think sleepy joe may be able to limp across the finish line.
: (11:58)
but today they announced that they’re going to cut way back on his appearances because he is such a disaster, they’re going to have fewer appearances. you’ve heard that, right? they’re going to cut way back on his appearances. can you believe it? if i ever did that, it would be over. the fake news would get us, but we don’t let them get us and it is fake. and today the deputy editor of the new york times was demoted. isn’t that beautiful? all the news that is not fit to print. all the news, the fake failing new york times. it’s really we, it’s not me. we’re doing it together. they came from the hills, they came from the mountains, from the rivers, they came from all over the place. and they showed up and they voted like nobody’s seen before. and it was 306 to 223, remember? 306.
: (13:08)
and we won wisconsin and they said, “oh, we never thought of that.” got to think about those things. and we won michigan. and now we have a lot of car companies coming into michigan, and we have a lot of great farming events happening, really big in wisconsin. and we have incredible things going on in pennsylvania. we just opened up a $10 billion plant. we have many of them going up. many of them, a lot of jobs. in louisiana, an lng plant $10 billion. could never have happened, could never have happened. pennsylvania would have never happened. they wouldn’t have allowed him to frack. so they would’ve never been able to build it. but what a place that is, it will be open in a little more than a year, but i have to make a decision. it’s a big decision. do we give up the greatest theme, phrase, logo, whatever you want to call it, in the history of politics, risky, for a brand new one because make america great again. we’re really sort of there, and we have a little time left. and now we have a group of socialists or communists, could be. they’re not far away. the fake news will hit me on that. how dare he say that? but they’re not far away, right? they’re not far away. 95%. does anybody want to pay 95% taxes? i don’t think so. but i’m not going to go into their plan because as far as i’m concerned, the green new deal is a beautiful thing. no, it’s a beautiful thing. we want it to continue onward until about a month before the election. i will let them have it like you’ve never heard before. i don’t want it to change. too early.
: (15:26)
it’s like elizabeth warren. i did the pocahontas thing. i hit her really hard, and it looked like she was down and out, but that was too long ago. i should’ve waited. but don’t worry. we will revive it. it can be revived. it can be rewritten, right? it will be revived and it can be revived very easily and very quickly. and we’re going to have some fun in the state of new hampshire. now what do we do, ready? let me have first make america great again, then keep america great, right? just applaud like crazy for the one you want to use for this campaign. and there’s a possibility we’ll use both. there’s a possibility we’ll use both ’cause i hate like hell to give up the one. is it a possibility we’ll use both? maybe one a little bit less. are you ready? so we’ll start make america great again, and then keep america. are you ready? who’s in favor of the campaign theme being make america great again?
: (16:53)
who’s in favor of our theme being keep america great? oh, wait a minute. this is your hat. i was going to keep it actually. thank you. so that’s really been the reaction. i’ve done this before. big crowds, and it really is keep america great because we have these socialists want to take it away from us. they want to take it away. because until a couple of days ago, and that’ll catch up very quickly, we have no choice. by the way, i never said china was going to be easy, but it’s not tough and they want to make a deal. we just spoke to them yesterday. they want to make a deal. they want to make a deal. they have to make a deal.
: (18:19)
and you know what? it’d be wonderful to make a deal. i don’t think we’re ready to make a deal. we’re taking in billions of dollars in tariffs. and again, china’s devaluing their currency. they’re pouring out money, the prices haven’t gone up. so that means we’re taking in billions of dollars. we’re not paying for it. and ultimately their devaluations are going to hurt them very badly. they want to make a deal, and they should want to make a deal. but when you listen to the fake news, look at how many there are. i mean, i actually had something today. i had something today. are we sure that we’re in new hampshire? you know, you have a reputation. i mean, i know it’s not true ’cause i know you too well. you have a reputation of being very stayed, very, very elegant, stayed, incredible people. you’re not acting it tonight, and that’s good. that’s a good thing.
: (19:57)
wow. we love our country. we have enthusiasm for our country. that’s what it is. before the election, our factories were closing. hey, who knows it better than you? you’re like central casting for the closing of factories. our jobs were vanishing. our military was totally depleted. when i took over, our military was sad. we weren’t flying half of our planes, they were old. they were tired. our equipment was tired. our people weren’t tired, though. our people weren’t tired. but everything we had, it was depleted. now we’ve rebuilt our military like never before. and all made in the usa, just so you know. and our nation was weakened at home and disrespected abroad. they don’t disrespect us anymore, folks.
: (21:07)
i got nato to pay an extra hundred billion dollars. they weren’t paying. they were delinquent. many nations were, except for seven. many nations weren’t paying what they were supposed to be paying, so we’re supposed to protect them. they kill us on trade. they have all sorts of barriers and everything else. the taxes are really unfair. the tariffs were ridiculous, what they do to us in europe. and then we protect them. then they don’t pay, and i say, “i’m sorry folks, you have to pay. you have to pay.” they were delinquent, they were delinquent. and my biggest fan is secretary general stoltenberg from nato. he said until president trump came along, we were going, boom. they would’ve been finished very quickly, but i’m tired of paying for other nations anyway, i have to be honest with you.
: (22:08)
today, our nation is stronger than ever before. we’re now stronger than ever before. you saw we ended the iran disaster. how about that? we paid them a $150 billion. $1.8 billion in cash. cash, cash, cash. we got nothing. and they also want to make a deal. china wants to make a deal, and i will tell you iran wants to make a deal because the sanctions are not good for them. they are not happy. so we’ll see how it all turns out. but it’s in good hands. it’s in good hands. the united states right now has the hottest economy anywhere in the world. we’re rebuilding that awesome might that we were just talking about. our united states armed forces. america is working again. america is winning again, and america is respected again, respected like never before. they respect us again, and you see it. you know, a recent poll came out where it showed that president obama was more popular in germany and other places than i am.
: (23:42)
and i said, of course he’s more popular. he’s not demanding that they pay for their protection that we provide. he’s not doing that. i’m doing that. and in fact, if i was the most popular, i’m not doing my job right. so true. we’ve created over six million new jobs since the election. if i would have said that during the campaign, those people back there would have been headlines, headlines. more than seven million americans have been lifted off of food stamps. since my election, the number of new businesses starting in the great state of new hampshire has skyrocketed by almost 25%.
: (24:49)
and you can’t really go by my election. you gotta go by november 9th because the markets have gone through the roof since november 9th. that’s the day after i won the election. so i won the election. the markets went up thousands of points. things started happening. you started doing things that you would’ve never. even though i didn’t get sworn in until january 20th, but they refused to do that. and let me tell you, if for some reason i wouldn’t have won the election, these markets would have crashed. that’ll happen even more so in 2020. see the bottom line is i know you like me and this room is a love fest, i know that. but you have no choice but to vote for me because your 401ks down the tubes. everything’s going to be down the tubes, so whether you love me or hate me, you got to vote for me. i had a businessman the other day, one of the most successful guys in the country. i’ve never liked him, never liked him. he never liked me, i never liked him. i see him in the white house. i said, “what are you doing here?” he said, i’m working to make sure you get elected.” i said, “you’ve got to be kidding. you don’t like me. i don’t like you. what the hell is this all about?” he said, “that’s right. we’ve had our differences. i haven’t liked you, but to be honest with you, mr. president, i have no choice.” i said, “you’re right. you’re right.”
: (26:37)
first thing i’ve ever heard him say that i agreed with, he’s got no choice. he got no choice. unemployment in new hampshire has reached the lowest rate in actually 31 years. but within a very short period of time, it will be the lowest rate in the history of our country. think of that. you have the best unemployment, you have the most successful state in the history of your state, and in the history of our country. and then you’re going to vote for somebody else? oh, great.
: (27:22)
let’s vote for elizabeth pocahontas warren. we have the best numbers we’ve ever had. let’s vote for somebody else. i don’t think that’s going to happen, folks. i don’t think that’s going to happen. only with fixed poles does that happen? unemployment for african americans. you’ve heard me say this many times, and i’m very proud of it. hispanic americans and asian americans have all reached their lowest rates ever recorded in the history of our county. wages are rising quickly. remember when i used to say people have been working two and three jobs making less money than they made 21 years ago? i used to say it all the time. now i can say for the first time in 20 years, wages are rising, and you know who’s the biggest beneficiary? blue collar workers. my administration is fighting to expand opportunity for citizens of every background and every race, religion, color, and creed. very important. because we are all americans. we all share the same home. we all share the same heart. we all share the same dreams. we are all children of the same almighty god. but at the very moment when our country should be coming together to enjoy these wonderful blessings, the radical democrats are trying to tear america apart. they vilify anyone who doesn’t share their extreme views. they slander our law enforcement heroes. you see what they’re doing with our police that we love. you see what they’re doing. has anyone ever seen anything like the water being thrown on new york’s finest? have you ever seen? and i know a lot of new york’s finest. they’re not happy, they’re not happy. and they are great people. these are great, great, proud people. for that to be allowed to happen is a disgrace.
: (30:15)
they view everybody as fascist and nazis. they used the term nazi. this was a term, you couldn’t even use it. now they use it like on a regular basis. nazi. he’s a nazi. think of that. he’s a nazi. you couldn’t use it. now they use it. they accuse our heroic border agents of running concentration camps, and they do an incredible job. and the democrats don’t want to fix the loopholes or asylum. they do an incredible job, our border agents. and they looked down upon the hardworking citizens who truly make our country run. but while the democrats rage and resist … that guy’s got a serious weight problem. go home, start exercising. get him out of here please. you got a bigger problem than i do. got a bigger problem than all of us. now he goes home and his mom says, “what the hell have you just done?” we are continuing our incredible movement, the greatest political movement in the history of our country. there’s never been a movement like this. never. our movement is built on love, and it is, and we love our family. we love our faith. we love our flag, and we love our freedom, and that’s what it’s about. and add to that the fact that we love our neighbors and we love our-
: (33:03)
… the fact that we love our neighbors and we love our country. together we are all united by one fundamental principal. a nation’s first duty must always be to its own citizens, it’s own. we’ve got to take care of our own. you haven’t heard that from a politician or a political leader in a long time. it’s called america first. it’s america first.
: (33:40)
we’re thrilled to be joined tonight by many tremendous republican leaders and great friends of mine, a man who’s doing an incredible job as your governor, because i want to take 100% of the credit for the incredible turnaround of new hampshire, and i remember it not so long ago, things were not looking good. people were leaving, a lot of bad things were happening, but we have to give him a lot of credit. he’s been a great governor, chris sununu, with a great father too, great father.
: (34:24)
with a great father… his father was tough. chris, your father was so tough. he was for somebody else in the primaries, and then one by one… i won here, i won there, i won there. and then when i won his father got on and i said, “oh, this guy kills me. he’s so tough,” and he said, “president trump will be the greatest of all time. i said, “what happened? what happened?” he went from being the toughest critic to the best there is. so i want to say hello to your father, okay chris? you’ll tell him. great guy. what a family. what a family. thank you for chris.
: (34:59)
new hampshire senate republican leader, chuck morse. chuck. thanks, chuck.
: (35:11)
new hampshire house republican leader, dick hinch. thank you, dick. thank you, dick. great job.
: (35:23)
a man who was with me right from the beginning. in fact, he had a meeting at his house. his house has never been the same. his house is a disaster now. like somebody said he just sold it. but you know what? because of the trump economy, i’ll bet he sold it for a big, big, fat, beautiful profit. where is steve? steve stepanek and his wife, who’s incredible. did you make a lot of money on the house?
: (35:54)
we destroyed the house. this was the beginning. he held some kind of a meeting for me, and he has a nice house, but literally hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of people showed up and they destroyed his house. it’s never been the same. no wonder you sold it. they finally gave up, and that was four years ago. anyway, thank you very much both for being here. i appreciate it. what great people. thank you, steve. great job. and i hope the buyer of his house didn’t hear that little… steve. i hope the buyer didn’t hear what i just said about your house. he’ll cancel… that’s all right. you’ll sell it for more to somebody else, don’t worry.
: (36:35)
republican party chair, ronna mcdaniel. you know, ronna headed up michigan, and for many, many years nobody won michigan as a republican. but i used to complain, i’d go there and i’d say “they’re stealing your car business.” i’d go for years. in fact, five or six years before i even thought about running, for whatever reason, they named me man of the year in michigan. i said, “how come?” i didn’t even understand it myself, but i was named man of the year. i wasn’t even political. that was years before i did this. but i was always complaining that our car business is being stolen. i mean, it’s sort of obvious, right? mexico now has 32% of our car business. it all left the state of michigan. we are bringing it back at a level that nobody’s ever seen before, our car business.
: (37:36)
but i went to michigan and my opponent was told that the republicans, no way you can win michigan, or wisconsin, that you just can’t. and we had a campaign manager named ronna mcdaniel, and ronna wouldn’t stop. “sir, can you be here next week?” i say, “i don’t know.” then i leave and she said, “sir, can you come back in three days?” i said, “i don’t know.” then i do it and she said, “how about another time?” and then on election night she said, “sir,” it was six o’clock the day before the election. in other words, just a short while before the election. she calls me, “sir, can you be here tonight?” i said “tonight?” and by the way, you know where i was? i was in new hampshire. that’s right. she said, “sir, can you be here tonight?” i said, “are you sure?”
: (38:37)
i started speaking at one o’clock in the morning. now it’s election day. we had 32,000 people show up. it was like this. the crowd was just, they want to see things happen in our country. they love our country. it went crazy. i left and i said, “i don’t know why going to lose michigan. why would we lose michigan? look at this.” the opponent went there with barack obama and michelle obama and she went there much earlier. prime time, one o’clock, two o’clock in the morning is not exactly prime time. we had 32,000 and they had a tiny little crowd, and i looked at my people and i said, “i know we’re not supposed to win the great state of michigan, but i think we’re going to win michigan” and we won michigan and we won wisconsin. we won wisconsin. wisconsin was a great victory, and we won pennsylvania, and we won north carolina and south carolina, and we won florida, and i hate to tell you we should’ve won new hampshire. that was taken away. new hampshire was taken away. it was taken away from us, but we should’ve. we did great in new hampshire. we should’ve won new hampshire, but that’s okay. i’m not holding it against you because it was not your fault.
: (40:06)
but we had a woman in michigan and i said, “when it came time to choosing the head of the republican national committee,” i said, “who the hell is that woman up in michigan that got me to keep coming there and explaining that we can’t continue to lose our car business?” we have 17 companies now coming back in. “who is that woman?” and it was ronna. we put her in charge of the republican national committee. the job that she has done is incredible. thank you.
: (40:45)
the same with another man, our campaign manager. he started off as a computer genius, and remember when they used to say that the hillary clinton campaign is highly sophisticated, highly… she did a lot of bad things folks. 33,000 emails deleted after getting a subpoena from the united states congress, 33,000. remember she said it was about her daughter’s wedding and yoga classes, 33,000, yes. it was disgraceful. i will tell you this, we now have a great attorney general. a fair guy, a great gentleman.
: (42:09)
another man who’s here tonight is the world’s tallest campaign manager. he is an unbelievable talent. but they were saying about our opponents… i’m not going to mention the name again because we’ll never get it finished here, so i’ll just say my opponent. is that better? they were saying how sophisticated her campaign was. except ours was far more sophisticated, and we had a man that did an incredible job. he’s now our campaign manager and he’s one of the tallest human beings i’ve ever seen. his name is brad parscale and he is fantastic. it’s nice when you don’t have to look for anybody. you just look over and you see a guy who’s twice as tall as everyone. great job, brad. thank you.
: (43:09)
how we doing, brad? good. doing good. got great poll numbers. we’ve got great poll numbers in a lot of states, ohio, iowa. you know iowa, every week that they campaign our numbers go up. they’re winning iowa. we gave them ethanol, which is very important. a lot of things for iowa, but every week we seem to be going up in iowa because they’re campaigning in iowa. wherever they go, our numbers go up. somebody’s going to have to explain that one to me someday, but we like it.
: (43:44)
a man who’s a friend of mine who was the greatest mayor in the history of new york city. stand up, rudy. stand up, rudy. rudy giuliani. man, he did a job in the first year. i’ve never seen anything like it. new york was crime infested. we had problems. we had problems like nobody would believe. rudy went in there and he did the job and people loved him for it. it wasn’t like, “oh gee, he’s a horrible person.” people loved rudy giuliani. he was a great, great mayor. so thank you, rudy, for being here.
: (44:55)
the first person that i put on on the campaign, he was driving me wild. he said, “i’m saying you can win, sir. you can win. i’m telling you, you can win.” he loves this state. he’s from this state. he said, “you can win, sir. i’m just telling you.” i had him on for month after month. he’d come drive me crazy. he’d say, “you can win, you can win, you can win.” and finally we said, “let’s give it a shot.” and i had corey, i had hope, i had just a couple of people. we had a rather lean and mean staff. but corey lewandowski loves your state, loves new hampshire. he was the first one that talked about us possibly winning the whole big ballgame. he’s tough and he’s smart and i’m hearing he’s thinking about running for the senate from new hampshire. there we go. i think he’d be tough to beat. i’ll tell you one thing, he’ll go into washington and he’s going to have you in mind. he’s going to do a job if he does do it, so we’ll see what happens. he hasn’t made up his mind yet, but he would be fantastic. i guess it’s something you go back and you talk to your family, you talk to your wife and you make a decision. they’re all saying, “are you going to support him?” i said, “i don’t know if he’s running.” so corey, let us know please, if you don’t mind. let us know.
: (46:36)
our shared republican agenda is pro worker, pro jobs, pro family, pro growth, and 100% pro american. for decades and decades the permanent politicians in washington pursued the very opposite. they sold out our workers. you see it. you know it better than any place. when i talk about the horrors of nafta, the horrors of trade deals… i mean, i’m sorry to tell you this, i usually refer to new hampshire. nobody took it worse than new england and nobody took it worse than new hampshire. now, here’s the good news. i would never let that happen again and chris will never let that happen again. is there a doctor, please? doctor in the house? thank you. doctor in the house. please, doctor, please. thank you very much. take your time. yeah, take your time. thank you. take your time, fellas. plenty of time. you know, people got here two and a half days ago, many of these people in the front, right? two and a half days ago, a lot of these people, so you can understand. it’s pretty tough. thank you. thank you. that’s okay. these are great people. these are great people that love our country, just remember that. thank you very much. thank you. thank you very much. pretty good. pretty good.
: (50:16)
so our politicians shipped away our jobs, shed our sovereignty, surrendered our dignity, and saddled our nation in one foreign debacle after another, and we’re still here. he just said it. we’re still here, you better believe it, and we’re here stronger than ever before we’re here. but all of that ended the day that i took the oath of office, the american people are in charge of their country again.
: (50:54)
we cut a record number of job-killing regulations that were strangling our country. we cut more regulations in two and a half years than any other president in their full terms. four years, eight years, or in one case more than that, cut more than anybody. to get relief to working families we passed the largest package of tax cuts and tax reforms in the history of our country. you’re making a lot more money. you’re making a lot more money and you see it and you know it because you see it in your paycheck every week.
: (51:38)
we ended the last administration’s cruel war on american energy and we are delivering a policy of american energy independence like you’ve never seen before. in fact, if you look at the straits where we’re having all of the problems, you look at the straits, number one, they’re not touching our ships, they’re not playing with our ships. they’re taking them from this country, from that country, from that country. but you know what? very importantly, we have very few ships going there anymore because we don’t need that oil and gas. the united states is now the number one producer of oil and natural gas anywhere in the world. every leading democrat has pledged abolish the american oil, coal, and natural gas industries that are fueling our economic boom. can you imagine this? we’re sitting on great wealth. they want to take it away from us, and the alternatives don’t have the power. they don’t have the power. they want wind, wind. wind is oh so beautiful, as long as you don’t have to stare at a windmill and your house goes down in value like to nothing. steve, if you had a windmill anywhere near your house you would’ve gotten one third of the price you got, steve. that’s true, by the way. steve’s too smart to let that happen.
: (53:22)
we won’t let them take it away from you. we are reversing decades of calamitous trade policies that shattered new hampshire and your factories. they shattered your communities and they shattered american power and american prestige all around the globe. new hampshire lost one in four manufacturing jobs following nafta and china’s entrance into the organization, two of the worst deals ever in the history of our world, not just our country.
: (54:01)
election after election, politicians came to your state pretending to have the courage to stand up for the american worker, then they went to washington and let other countries push them around, and special interests, buy them off and steal your jobs and take your companies. that’s what happened. me, i don’t care about their campaign contributions. it doesn’t matter to me, folks. we want to do a job. we want to do a great job, and we’re setting records, and you know who’s sending us the money? the small donors. well, we have big donors, but we have small donors are sending us the money for the election. pretty amazing. that’s not supposed to happen to a republican, but it’s happening to this republican and it’s happening to you.
: (54:59)
every vow that politicians made was broken, every hope was dashed, and every promise turned into a total betrayal of new hampshire and of our country. but in this administration, we have something those sell-out politicians could only dream of. it’s called strength and commitment. we don’t play games. we don’t play games. after years and years of building up other countries we are finally building up our country, standing up for our jobs, our workers, and standing up for our dignity. the forgotten men and women of america will never ever be forgotten again. you were forgotten.
: (56:16)
the last administration with sleepy joe and obama tried to ram through one of the worst trade deals ever negotiated, worse than nafta, worse than wto. it was called the trans-pacific partnership. it would have been a disaster. tpp would have gutted the american auto industry. it would have been in shambles. our auto industry is coming back so strong. it would’ve gutted, would’ve destroyed the industry. but in my first week in office i proudly withdrew the united states from that job-destroying catastrophe. we’re imposing beautiful well-placed tariffs, money comes in, on foreign countries that cheat our workers, steal our jobs, and break all the rules, i’m sorry.
: (57:17)
and by the way, they’ve been changing and charging tariffs on us for years. we have countries that charge us 100%, 200%, 297% in the case of canada with your farm products. we’re not going to stand for it, and man, did we turn things around and we’ve just started. if companies don’t want to pay a tariff, i have one simple solution. come make your product in america. come make your product in new hampshire. zero tariffs. zero. no tariff.
: (58:14)
together we’re restoring this nation’s industrial might and we are doing it with american iron, american aluminum, and american steel. we’re doing it steel. steel industry is high. they were dumping steel all over. they were destroying our companies. us steel now, all of them, they’re all expanding. the steel industry is back. it’s doing great. we’re opening up mines in minnesota, the great state of minnesota. they have magnificent mines that have the best iron ore in the world and president obama closed them down. maybe we can get representative omar from minnesota to open it up, but i don’t think so. she’ll open them up. i don’t think so. representative omar, that’s another one.
: (59:16)
we’re replacing nafta with the brand new usmca. that’s mexico and canada. great deal. the usmca will create countless jobs for farmers and manufacturers all across the state. we need congress to pass the usmca immediately. we’ll make it a bipartisan deal. we don’t even want credit. the unions benefit. the non-unions benefit. everybody benefits. it brings it back to fairness and it makes it very hard for our companies to leave our countries, go to mexico or canada. we lose all our jobs. we lose all our taxes. we end up with empty factories and plants. it makes it almost impossible. we’re not going to have that. that was my one rule that i had to have. it’s going to be very, very hard for companies to do that.
: (01:00:16)
i’ve also taken the toughest ever action to stand up to china’s chronic trade abuses. earlier this month, the us government officially labeled china for the first time ever a currency manipulator, another promise kept. while others allowed china to freely loot the us economy, $500 billion a year, not million, not million, billion with a b. we’ve made it clear that the theft of american jobs and american wealth is over. yet today, the wall street journal editorial board and some others continue to publish foolish articles that demonstrate that they understand nothing about trade or business. nothing. they advocate only economic surrender. they actually say, “go to china, take off the tariffs, make a deal.” i lose all the cards we take off the tariffs. we don’t have any cards. think of it. they say “go to europe.”.
: (01:01:35)
by the way, the european union is worse than china, just smaller. it treats us horribly. barriers, tariffs, taxes, and we let them come in. it’s worse than china. many of us come from there. i do. that’s what it’s got going. that’s about it. they treat us really badly, and many others, many, many others. india tariffs us probably higher than any nation anywhere in the world. we have tariffs of 100% on products and much more than that. india.
: (01:02:14)
so we’re working on all of them. i called prime minister modi. i said, “mr. prime minister, it’s not fair. we’ve got to change, we’ve got to change, we’ve got to change,” and we’re talking to them very seriously. we’re talking to a lot of places. but when the wall street journal comes out and they say, ” no, no, take the tariffs. go and talk to china.” they’ve been trying to talk to them for 25 years. but actually, you know what? they really haven’t. the fact is the leaders that were in my position, they didn’t do a damn thing. they didn’t talk. they didn’t talk. past leaders followed the terrible advice of these editorial boards that are frankly totally inexperienced in business, i guess, and our industries were utterly decimated. globalism enriches foreign countries at our expense. globalism. i love our country. i’m the president of the united states of america. i’m not the president of the the world.
: (01:03:23)
as long as i’m president, america will never bow to a foreign nation like we were for so many years. as we restore our prosperity, we are also restoring public safety. we are fighting to reduce violent crime. you see so much, and over the last 25 years so much crime, and ensure that every american can live in safety and peace. and yet with all that you see, we’ve had one of the best years of crime prevention that we’ve ever had. it wouldn’t seem that way, but it is one of the best years because those gentlemen that we just saw, the law enforcement, they do a great job.
: (01:04:22)
you’ve been reading about this a lot lately. we are working very hard to make sure we keep guns out of the hands of insane people and those who are mentally sick and shouldn’t have guns. but people have to remember, however, that there is a mental illness problem that has to be dealt with. it’s not the gun that pulls the trigger. it’s the person holding the gun. years ago, many cities and states, i remember it so well, closed mental institutions for budgetary reasons. they let those people out onto the street. you probably have your examples up here. i can tell you in new york they closed so many of them and they let really seriously mentally ill people out on the streets, and you see plenty of them today, even today. we’re going to have to give major consideration to building new facilities for those in need. we have to do it. and at the same time, we will be taking mentally deranged and dangerous people off of…
: (01:06:03)
… mentally deranged and dangerous people off of the streets so we won’t have to worry so much about that. the big problem. we don’t have those institutions anymore and people can’t get proper care. they’re seriously ill people and they’re on the streets. we can’t make it harder for good, solid law abiding citizens to protect themselves. we will always uphold the right to self defense and we will always uphold the second amendment. we will.
: (01:06:52)
so important. one of the most powerful promises i made to the people of this state was to confront the opioid and drug epidemic. i used to go around new hampshire more than any state and you’d say, “sir, the state is infested.” you said, “sir, we’ll like a drug den.” you tell me. and i didn’t really see it. and then i met with the police officers and fire departments and all the people that do. and you just seem to have a bigger problem. and by the way, the wall is being built. that’s-
: (01:07:33)
that’s going to stop a lot of it. the wall is being built.
speaker 1: (01:08:03)
build the wall. build the wall. build the wall. build the wall. build the wall. build the wall. build the wall.
: (01:08:07)
it’s being built.
: (01:08:08)
you know, we have the fake news. you know about that, where they … a wall that’s lying on the ground in a very important section. so we pick up the wall, it’s in pieces. i mean literally it’s gone and we build a brand new 30 foot steel and concrete wall and the fake media said, “he didn’t build a wall. that’s just renovation. there was no wall, it’s lying on the ground.” people walk right over and it’s rotted, rusted, gone. we take it away. we put a brand new wall up. they give me no credit. you know why? because they’re fake news. that’s why.
: (01:08:54)
we’re building a lot of walls. the army corps of engineers is doing a great job. they’re doing a great job.
: (01:09:04)
since i took office, we’ve attacked the challenge with everything we have. we have secured a record $6 billion in new funding. opioid. we vastly increase the distribution of overdose reversing drugs, which are pretty amazing things. we’ve given them to your police department, your fire department, pretty amazing. we have reduced the total amount of opioids prescribed by 34%. the department of justice has prosecuted more than 3000 defendants in opioids related cases. and our public awareness campaign about the terrible suffering that drugs inflict has already reached 58% of all young americans.
: (01:09:59)
i said that you have to show them. we’re doing ads beautiful ads. shows them, and you’ve seen them. i don’t even want to describe them. they’re brutal. but we’re doing ads on television and papers about how bad it is for children so they can see it. because the greatest thing we can do is not get people started on drugs, right. not get them started.
: (01:10:22)
it’s hard to get off. you know, we can get them off and we’re doing it and it’s been done. but it’s hard to get off. if they never start. it’s real easy. it’s real easy. so we’re trying to get young kids, you won’t see the fruits of this labor for a little while because it takes a while. but we’re really, we are working so hard on advertising and promotions to tell young kids, children how bad drugs are, how dangerous they are, how horrible they are, how they destroy your brain, how they do so many bad things. and they’re really very tough ads. they’re hard hitting ads. and i think they’re having a big impact. you’ll see over time you’ll see. over time you’ll see.
: (01:11:09)
but we still have much work to do. but as a result of these efforts, last year we saw the first nationwide decline in drug overdose deaths in 31 years.
: (01:11:23)
that’s pretty amazing.
: (01:11:26)
and at the center of america’s drug crisis is the border crisis. vast quantities of deadly narcotics are being smuggled across the border including meth, cocaine, heroin and fentanyl. and as part of my trade deal with china, it’s been very important. and president xi said he’s going to do it. so far he has not done it. but i said, “you have to stop sending us fentanyl.” have to. “and you have to criminalize in china the making of fentanyl.” and so far he has not come through, but i think he will. you’ll know, you’ll know.
: (01:12:12)
yet democrats want to open borders and republicans want strong borders. that you’re difference. one wants open borders. who can even think of an open border? think of it? even though many people that come into our country are wonderful people, they’re are still coming in illegally. they’re not coming in through merit. but what about the bad ones? we have serious, serious criminals that want to come in, and if we had open borders they would be flowing in like you’ve never seen before. democrats want open borders, they don’t mind crime. we do mind crime and that’s the way it is.
: (01:12:58)
democrats also support deadly sanctuary cities. last year alone sanctuary cities declined more than 17,000 requests from federal authorities to hand over criminal aliens already in their custody. in other words, 17,000 criminal aliens were released by these cities directly into us communities. you don’t understand even what the hell are they doing? what are they doing? 17,000. republicans believe our city should be sanctuaries for law abiding americans, not for criminal aliens.
: (01:13:50)
we will always support the amazing heroes of ice and border patrol, and we will always support law enforcement. every democrat candidate also wants to give illegal immigrants free welfare.
: (01:14:17)
republicans believe public benefits should be protected for truly needy americans, not for illegal aliens. and we should reduce our taxes and many other things with all of that money that we’re talking about.
: (01:14:35)
we need to elect a strong republican majority to end sanctuary cities. stop human traffickers, stop drug smugglers and adopt an immigration system that puts the needs of american workers and families first.
: (01:14:58)
it’s also time for democrats to join with us to protect the sacred integrity of our elections by supporting voter id, voter identification.
: (01:15:22)
it’s incredible. they’re constantly saying, “oh, we need to protect them.” but they’re not looking for that. they’re not looking for that. we say, “what about voter id? in other words, you have a picture, you have to go up. what about voter id?” that they don’t want to do, but we need voter id.
: (01:15:58)
the democrat party has never been farther outside the mainstream.
: (01:16:18)
where do they come from? you know, you say you want low taxes, good education, strong military, strong borders. you want to have safe homes. you want a house, you want low interest rates, you’ve got low … hey, you got low interest rates. the lowest ever. got low rates, it’s a good time to refinance your house, by the way. great time. you got everything, and then you see these people they’re against … they have no idea what they’re doing. they have no idea what they’re against. every major democrat running for president supports a massive government takeover of healthcare that would raid medicare and destroy the private health insurance plans of millions of american families that they love. my administration is defending your right to choose the plan and the doctor that is best for you.
: (01:17:18)
the individual mandate is gone. the most unpopular part of obamacare, and we almost have obamacare gone. we’re close. we would have had it before, but we had a vote that was a little bit surprising. i’m sure none of you knew who that vote was. we had it done, repealed and replaced. but it’s going to happen and i think it’s going to actually be in the end, actually better. you watch.
: (01:17:42)
so we got rid of the individual mandate, which was the most unpopular part of obamacare. and we’re running it better. you know, i had a political decision. do i make it great? alex azar our secretary, do rerun it well and sort of say, “hey, we run it well.” or do we run it badly and have everybody upset? we said, we got to run it well, but it’s still much too expensive. it’s lousy healthcare. but we got rid of the worst part of it. individual mandate, individual mandate, where you have the privilege of buying the right not to have to pay for expensive insurance. that’s no good health insurance. and we won’t … and you got to remember this. republicans, and i speak for every one of them, we will always protect pre-existing conditions. we’re going to protect, always. right, got to do it.
: (01:18:39)
our ambitious campaign to reduce the price of prescription drugs has produced the largest decline in drug prices in 51 years. the only decline in 51 years. we have launched a historic initiative to require price transparency, empowering you to choose the lowest price for yourself and for your family. believe it or not, you didn’t have the right to go in and price your drugs. who could even believe this? i wonder if big pharma had something to do with that.
: (01:19:19)
so we’re going to have transparency. virtually every top democrat also now supports late term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mothers womb. right up, up till … right up until the moment of birth. and in the case of the virginia governor, he’s having a rough, rough time. in his case, the baby is born, and then he goes to talk to the mother. the doctor talks to the mother. the baby is now born, wrapped as he said, and then they decide whether or not to execute the baby.
: (01:20:01)
who would believe that.
: (01:20:06)
that is why i’ve asked congress to prohibit extreme late term abortion because republicans believe that every child is a sacred, the gift of god.
: (01:20:29)
hard to believe isn’t that. democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late term abortion and socialism.
: (01:20:42)
the republican party is the party of freedom. we are the party of the american worker, the american family, and the american dream and i’m fighting for you each and every day. so importantly we have confirmed more than 140 federal judges. within 90 days it will be 179 federal judges. thank you very much president obama. thank you very much.
: (01:21:25)
i don’t know what happened to them, but i came to office and i had 138 judges that were not appointed by president obama. so i say, thank you mr. president, very good and they’ll say he was a great president. oh, the fake news. he was a great president. if he was a great president how come he left me 138 judges to appoint when everybody says that’s the single most important thing a president of the united states has to do. great president. he was great. he was a great president.
: (01:22:02)
and these judges will apply the law as written, including we appointed two great supreme court justices, neil gorsuch and brett kavanaugh.
: (01:22:22)
and to help patients with life threatening illnesses we also pass something i’m so proud of, 44 years they couldn’t get it passed, right to try. you can use our newest, our best medicines.
: (01:22:38)
incredible. what’s happening. i’m so proud of that. and this from forever, five decades. we pass for our great veterans va choice and va accountability. and one of our great friends was a veteran who’s been with me in new hampshire. i don’t know where you are. where’s our guy? where is he?
: (01:23:19)
so, al. so, i walk in i said, hello. he’s been with me from the beginning. he wasn’t with … he liked trump. and i came in. he said, sir, he’s a great veteran. he said, “sir, i have cancer. and sir, i went into the vet. they were very, very late. they had problems. i’m not blaming them, but they gave me the right to go out and get a great cancer surgeon.” he had his operation. you look much better than you did three years ago al, much better. much better. va choice, right al. va choice.
: (01:24:04)
great story. thank you very much, and thank you for your loyalty. he’s been to every rally i ever gave a new hampshire right from the beginning. i got so tired of looking at him. he’d always be here. now he’s … look at him, now he’s sitting in very good. that’s good. but i appreciate that story. i appreciate. va choice just makes sense, right? doesn’t it make sense?
: (01:24:28)
we’ve achieved record funding for the united states military. $716 billion, $700 billion and $738 billion. and it’s almost completely rebuilt. including, and we hope to god we never have do use it. we have the finest, most powerful nuclear capability anywhere on the face of the earth. and i hope to god we never have to use it.
: (01:25:06)
we’re investing in the future of human space flight. and someday soon american astronauts will plant the stars and stripes on the surface of mars.
: (01:25:23)
i told my guys at nasa, you know, nasa, when we took it over, it was exhausted. the runways and the grounds had all weeds growing through the cracks in the concrete. you wouldn’t recognize it now. it’s beautiful. it’s the best place anywhere on earth. and i also said, though, you know, i hear all these rich guys for some reason, they love space. so they’re rich. i said, let them send the rockets up. what the hell do we have to do it? right? so i see jeff bezos and elon musk, they’re putting rockets up. i think it’s great. and they pay us rent. they use our facility. that’s great. but we’re also doing it, and nasa has some of the greatest plans we’ve ever had. these are great people, great scientists.
: (01:26:08)
but we also let the private sector put up rockets. the one which recently went up and you see the engines coming back down and they coming … there’s no wings, no nothing. it’s almost like, what are we watching is this fiction? and they come down and they save all of the propellants. all of the, really the most expensive parts. they’re able to save it by bringing it back right to where it took off. who would think they could do this? i never saw this before six months ago, but they’re doing it now more and more. they’re saving a lot of the most important and expensive parts of rockets. so we have a lot of rich guys paying us a lot of rent. but we’re also doing it ourselves.
: (01:26:52)
to protect america’s security. i withdrew the united states from the horrible one-sided iran nuclear deal.
: (01:27:04)
i recognized israel’s true capital and opened the american embassy in jerusalem.
: (01:27:21)
and just three months ago, we also recognized the golan heights as being a part of and protected by israel. for years you watched as your politicians apologized for america. now you have a president who is standing up for america and we are standing up for the people of new hampshire. thank you.
: (01:27:56)
and you must never forget the 2020 election right around the corner. 2020 right around the corner. and it’s about one thing. you know what the one thing is, you. it’s about you. it’s about your family. it’s about your future. and it’s about the fate of your country.
: (01:28:22)
so when we ran together last time, we said the most importantly we had to turn it around. this country was going bad. you see what happened to venezuela with socialism? venezuela 15 years ago was one of the richest countries. now they don’t have water, they don’t have food, they don’t have anything. and this was one of the richest nations in the world. they don’t have anything. we’re working on it. we’re helping people, but it’s very sad. it’s never going to happen to us because we will never ever be a socialist nation. ever. no matter what label they use, a vote for any democrat in 2020 is a vote for the rise of radical socialism and the destruction … the destruction of the american dream. we have a dream. it’s a great dream. this the destruction of the american dream.
: (01:29:25)
we begin this campaign tonight with the best record, the best results, the best agenda, and the only positive vision for the people of new hampshire and for the people of america.
: (01:29:46)
together we will lift millions more citizens from welfare to work, dependence to independence, and poverty to prosperity. millions and millions of people. with your help, we will elect a republican congress to create a safe, modern, fair and lawful system of immigration.
: (01:30:14)
we will enact trade deals that are already happening that ensure more products are proudly stamped with that beautiful phrase made in the usa. we will achieve new breakthroughs in science and medicine, ending the aids epidemic in america and finding new cures for childhood cancer.
: (01:30:46)
something i never thought i’d be able to say, within one decade the aids epidemic in the united states will be gone. think of that. did you ever think you were going to hear that? no. did you ever think you were going to hear that? the work they’ve done on aids is incredible. that’s an incredible thing. when they told me that, it’s just shattering. it just, it breaks your heart what’s happened. but think of it in 10 years, the aids epidemic will be eradicated. so great. who thought that was going to be happening.
: (01:31:26)
who thought i’d be able to get to say that so early in what we’re doing together.
: (01:31:34)
we will defend privacy, free speech, free assembly, religious liberty, and the right to keep and bear arms. above all, we will never stop fighting for the values that bind us together. there is one america we will support, protect and defend the constitution of the united states.
: (01:32:19)
we’ll stand with the incredible men and women of law enforcement.
: (01:32:28)
we believe in the dignity of work and in the sanctity of life.
: (01:32:35)
we believe that faith and family, not government and bureaucracy are the true american way.
: (01:32:46)
we believe that children should be taught to love our country, honor our history, and to always respect our great american flag. through every day and every challenge our hearts speak to the words of the new hampshire state motto, live free or die.
speaker 1: (01:33:18)
usa. usa. usa. usa. usa. usa. usa. usa. usa. usa.
: (01:33:39)
we are fighting for every american mom and dad who wants to protect this land of liberty for their precious, beautiful children. we are fighting for every young boy and girl who deserves to grow up in a nation of builders and dreamers, pioneers and patriots, and we are fighting for every citizen of the greatest republic on the face of this earth.
: (01:34:12)
every day my presidency, we will never forget that we are americans and the future belongs to us. the brave this beautiful, strong, proud, and free future. it belongs to us. it’s up to us. we control our own destiny.
: (01:34:39)
and with your help, your devotion and your drive. we are going to keep on working. we are going to keep on fighting and we are going to keep on winning, winning, winning. we are one great movement. one people, one family and one glorious nation under god.
: (01:35:14)
and together we are making america wealthy again. we are making america strong again. we are making america safe again. and we are making america great again. thank you. new hampshire. thank you. thank you. i am thrilled to be here in iowa among so many good friends.

iowa is fortunate to have some of the best and most dedicated public servants in the country – including governor terry branstad, lt. governor kim reynolds, state gop chairman jeff kauffman, senator chuck grassley and, of course, our great host, senator joni ernst.

what an incredible roster.

i also want to take a moment to thank the bikers who have been so good to me throughout this campaign. i can’t tell you how much it means to me. they are fantastic people who truly love our country.

more than anything, today, i want to express my gratitude to our amazing veterans. we will not let you down.

together, we are going to win this state in november – and we are going to win the white house for the american people.

the white house will become the people’s house. we will tackle and fix the problems that have gone unsolved for years: failing schools, crumbling infrastructure, broken borders, bloated bureaucracy, wasteful spending, and a government that just doesn’t work.

 speaks at joni ernst's roast and ride at the iowa state fairgrounds, in des moines, iowa, on aug. 27.
2016
trump talks to a white crowd about black voters
by eli stokols
this is a campaign about big ideas designed to help everyday people. these are the people who work hard but who don’t have a voice.

it’s also a campaign about restoring honesty and accountability to government service.

the whole world has been shocked by the continuing revelations regarding hillary clinton and her pay-for-play state department.

now it was just announced that her important calendar records will not be released to the public until after the election – more protection from a corrupt government.

as i’ve said many times in recent days, it’s hard to tell where the clinton foundation ends, and where the state department begins.

the clinton corruption scandals have been a sad time for america. the illegal server, the foreign hacking, the deleted emails, the secret schedules, the lying to congress. it’s all just too much. how much more can voters take?

hillary clinton thinks she’s entitled to be president – she thinks that she’s above the law. but the truth is the opposite: her criminal conduct at home, and her failed interventions overseas, simply make her unfit to serve in the oval office.

i believe america is ready to turn the page on this sordid past. we don’t want another 4 years of obama or clinton controversies: they’re not only dangerous but, frankly, exhausting to the people. how do you even keep up with them all?

the clintons have had their time on the stage– but now it’s time to close that chapter in the history book and open a new one.

that is why this is such an exciting year to be a republican, and to vote republican.

this year, the gop is offering the voters a chance to break-up the corrupt establishment and to create a new american future.

this chance will never come again.

the big banks and wall street donors who want nothing to change are throwing millions and millions at my opponent. these are the same people who paid bill and hillary clinton $150 million for speeches.

hillary clinton’s campaign is all about protecting the powerful.

our campaign is about protecting those who have no power.

together, we are going to give working people a voice for the first time in a very, very long time.

let’s talk about what that means.

for our veterans, it means a guarantee that they can seek medical care at either a va facility or at a private medical doctor.

never again will we allow a veteran to die waiting for the care they need. we will protect those who protect us.

at the center of our change agenda is also a plan to fix our rigged economy.

the government just revised the growth numbers for last quarter down again – it’s now only 1.1 percent. that’s not just bad, it’s catastrophic. we’re going to make america grow again.

that begins with supporting our family farms right here in iowa.

family farms are the backbone of this country. we are going to end the epa intrusion into your family homes and your family farms.

we are going to protect the renewable fuel standard, eliminate job-killing regulations like the waters of the u.s. rule, and provide desperately-needed tax relief.

almost 97% of farms in this country are family-owned and family-managed. it’s not only a great american tradition, but a vital component of america’s economic and national security.

yet, hillary clinton wants to shut down family farms just like she wants to shut down the mines and the steelworkers. she will do this not only through radical regulation, but also by raising taxes on family farms – and all businesses – to rates as high as nearly 50 percent. adding to the pain, she will tax family farms again at death by as much as 45 percent.

on top of that, her anti-energy agenda will drive up the cost of energy – another attack on agriculture.

we are going to end this war on the american farmer.

that includes our plan to lower the tax rate on family farms down to 15 percent, and to stop the double-taxation of family farms at death – helping to ensure that the family farm tradition in iowa continues to thrive and flourish.

my economic agenda can be summed up in three words: jobs, jobs, jobs.

i am asking for the support of all americans who want more opportunity, higher wages, safe communities, competent leadership, and honest government.

we are going to send the special interests packing, and we are going to once again have a government of, by, and for the people.

republicans are the party of lincoln.

which brings me to a subject that is so important and personal for me. nothing means more to me than working to make our party the home of the african-american vote once again.

there are millions of african-americans in this country who have succeeded so greatly and who deserve a government that protects and honors their incredible contribution.

but we also have to talk about the millions of african-americans who remain trapped in poverty and failing schools.

i’ve spoken a lot in recent days about the deplorable conditions in many of our inner cities. as a father, as a builder, as an american, it offends my sense of right and wrong to see anyone living in such conditions.

almost 40 percent of african-american children are living in poverty – including 45 percent of children under the age of six.

in detroit, half of its residents do not work. in milwaukee, almost 4 in 10 african-american men between the age of 24-54 are not employed.

more than 6,000 african-americans are the victims of murder every year.

just yesterday, the cousin of nba star dwayne wade was the victim of a tragic shooting in chicago. she was the mother of 4, and was killed while pushing her infant child in a stroller.

it breaks our hearts. this shouldn’t happen in america. we send our thoughts and our prayers to the family, and we also promise to fight for a better tomorrow.

across chicago, more than 2,700 have been shooting victims since january of this year.

we cannot, as a society, tolerate this level of violence and suffering in our own cities. those who would deny that this is a national crisis – a crisis requiring urgent action – have no business running for elected office.

failed democratic policies – the policies of hillary clinton – have created this high crime and crushing poverty.

in so many communities under democratic control, we have bad schools, no jobs, high crime, and no hope. it can’t get any worse. to those suffering, i say: vote for  and i will fix it. what do you have to lose?

let me also tell you what you have to gain: millions of jobs, better schools and safe communities.

by the way, how quickly people have forgotten that hillary clinton called black youth “super-predators,” and how insulted they were.

i am running to offer a better future – to the citizens of detroit, baltimore, chicago, and all across this great land.

african-americans have given so much to this country. they’ve fought and died in every war since the revolution. they’ve lifted up the conscience of our nation in the civil rights movement. they’ve sacrificed so much for the national good.

now is the time to put a new agenda into action that expands opportunity, ensures equality, and that protects the rights of each and every citizen.

this includes one of the most important rights of all: the right to live in safety. i will work with communities, with police, and with federal law enforcement, to make communities safe and secure for all of our people.

we are also going to end the discrimination that traps parents and kids in failing government schools. the republican party is the party of school choice.

there is another civil rights issue we need to talk about, and that’s the issue of immigration enforcement.

every time an african-american citizen, or any citizen, loses their job to an illegal immigrant, the rights of that american citizen have been violated.

equal protection under the law must include the consistent application of our immigration laws.

these laws were passed to protect american citizens and lawful residents. for instance, federal law protects the ability of american workers to seek jobs and employment. when government suspends those immigration laws in order to curry favor with special interests – costing americans their jobs – they have been denied the protection of their laws.

in recent days, the media – as it usually does – has missed the whole point on immigration. all the media wants to talk about is the 11 million or more people here illegally.

but my priority is the well-being of 300 million american citizens, including millions of hispanic citizens and legal residents who want a secure border, a safe and drug-free community, and a growing economy.

my goal is to provide good jobs, good schools, and safety to every hispanic community in the country. but we can’t do that if we don’t secure our border.

on day one, i am going to begin swiftly removing criminal illegal immigrants from this country – including removing the hundreds of thousands of criminal illegal immigrants that have been released into u.s. communities under the obama-clinton administration.

these international gangs and cartels will be a thing of the past. their reign of terror will be over. in this task, we will always err on the side of protecting the american people – we will use immigration law to prevent crimes, and will not wait until some innocent american has been harmed or killed before taking action.

i am going to build a great border wall, institute nationwide e-verify, stop illegal immigrants from accessing welfare and entitlements, and develop an exit-entry tracking system to ensure those who overstay their visas are quickly removed. if we don’t enforce visa expiration dates, then we have an open border – it’s as simple as that.

i am also going to cancel all unconstitutional executive orders and empower rank-and-file ice officers and border patrol officers to finally do the jobs they were hired for.

now, what is hillary clinton going to do?

she has pledged amnesty in her first 100 days, combined with the elimination of virtually all routine immigration enforcement. in other words, totally open borders. which will lead to a massive crime wave.

most alarmingly, she has pledged to keep president obama’s executive amnesty – which has been blocked by the supreme court – directly disregarding a supreme court injunction.

beyond that, she has pledged to add another executive amnesty in violation of both congressional law and the u.s. constitution.

these actions from hillary clinton will trigger one of the greatest constitutional crisis in american history. in effect, she is pledging to abolish the law-making powers of congress and assume the powers of an imperial ruler.

this executive amnesty would bypass congress to print millions of work permits and benefit cards to those ineligible to receive them.

hillary clinton’s immigration proposal will also give illegal immigrants access to obamacare, social security, medicare and all u.s. welfare. her plan will functionally end enforcement of visa overstays rules, another open border decree. she will also close down detention centers for border-crossers, meaning we will have an open southern border as well.

this is not to mention that hillary clinton wants a 550% increase in syrian refugees. she can’t even say the words: radical islamic terrorism.

and she supports the sanctuary city and catch-and-release policies that are getting innocent americans killed. i’ve met with many of these grieving families, including the incredible family of sarah root, a young iowa girl who was killed by an illegal immigrant released from the border by the obama administration – and then released again after the killing. i’ve been so inspired by the courage and bravery of the root family and i’d like to invite them on the stage right now just to say a few words.

thank you. there is a reason why 16,500 border patrol agents have endorsed our campaign, and warned that hillary clinton’s plan is “deeply dangerous” “divisive” “radical” “reckless” “wrecking innocent lives” “panders to extremists” and would create “unprecedented crisis”

so the choice couldn’t be more clear. a vote for trump is a vote to have a nation of laws, a vote for clinton is a vote for open borders.

on every issue, our campaign is about making life better for working people. but we can’t accomplish that goal unless we break-up the special interest monopoly and give power back to the citizens.

many people have said that establishment media assault on me and our campaign – we have a movement – is the greatest in the political history of our country. even today, some major papers fail to mention how strong our poll numbers have become over the short one-week period – they just refuse to print anything positive or good.

they too are part of the rigged system trying to deny people the positive change they deserve. they take phrases and statements, chop them up, take them out of context, and discuss them for days. always trying to demean and belittle me and our incredible movement to take our country back from the death spiral it is currently in.

imagine if this much media attention was spent telling the truth about the real problems facing america. imagine if the media spent this much time telling the story of sarah root.

all of the ugly things being said by hillary clinton in recent days – funded by big banks and wall street donors – are nothing more than a desperate attempt by failed leaders to cling to power in order to keep rigging the system.

there is nothing they won’t say or do, no lie they won’t tell – and no amount of money they won’t spend – to try to bully voters into giving them what they want.

this november 8th, the american people are going to reject the cynicism of the past and embrace the optimism of the future.

the old attacks aren’t going to work anymore. the clinton-kaine fear-mongering isn’t going to resonate with anyone but the most radical factions of their far-left base.

i want to empower people. hillary clinton wants to scare people.

empowering people begins with three simple words: jobs, jobs, jobs.

our economy will soar.

wages will rise.

we will make new friends abroad, and achieve new peace at home.

we will be a country of laws, and a country of great success.

our cities will be safe, sound and secure.

our government will be honest, ethical and responsive.

rule by special interests will be over. the rule of the american people will begin.

so let’s get out and vote on november 8th, and create the future our children deserve.

together, we will make america strong again.

we will make american wealthy again.

we will make america united again.

we will make america safe again.

and we will make america great again – for everyone.

thank you, and god bless you all.thank you so much.  that's so nice.  isn't he a great guy.  he doesn't get a fair press; he doesn't get it.  it's just not fair.  and i have to tell you i'm here, and very strongly here, because i have great respect for steve king and have great respect likewise for citizens united, david and everybody, and tremendous resect for the tea party.  also, also the people of iowa.  they have something in common.  hard-working people.  they want to work, they want to make the country great.  i love the people of iowa.  so that's the way it is.  very simple.

with that said, our country is really headed in the wrong direction with a president who is doing an absolutely terrible job.  the world is collapsing around us, and many of the problems we've caused.  our president is either grossly incompetent, a word that more and more people are using, and i think i was the first to use it, or he has a completely different agenda than you want to know about, which could be possible.  in any event, washington is broken, and our country is in serious trouble and total disarray.  very simple.  politicians are all talk, no action.  they are all talk and no action.  and it's constant; it never ends.

and i'm a conservative, actually very conservative, and i'm a republican.  and i'm very disappointed by our republican politicians.  because they let the president get away with absolute murder.  you see always, oh we're going to do this, we're going to--.  nothing ever happens; nothing ever happens.

you look at obamacare.  a total catastrophe and by the way it really kicks in in '16 and it is going to be a disaster.  people are closing up shops.  doctors are quitting the business.  i have a friend of mine who's a doctor, a very good doctor, a very successful guy.  he said, i have more accountants than i have patients.  and he needs because it is so complicated and so terrible and he's never had that before and he's going to close up his business.  and he was very successful guy.  but it's happening more and more.

look at obamacare with a $5 billion website.  i have many websites, many, many websites.  they're all over the place.  but for $10, okay?

now everything about obamacare was a lie.  it was a filthy lie.  and when you think about it, lies, i mean are they prosecuted?  does anyone do anything?  and what are the republican politicians doing about it?  he lied about the doctor, he lied about every aspect.  you can keep your plan.  and you've all heard that hundreds of times.  that's like the real estate location, location.  i don't even say it anymore because everybody goes location, location.  but you have heard this about obamacare.

and it's disgraceful.  it's a big, fat, horrible lie.  your deductibles are going through the roof.  you're not going to get--unless you're hit by an army tank, you're not going to get coverage.  and people that had plans that they loved, that they really loved, don't have those plans anymore.  so it's a real, real disaster.  and somebody has to repeal and replace obamacare.  and they have to do it fast and not just talk about it.

now, we have to build a fence.  and it's got to be a beauty.  who can build better than trump?  i build; it's what i do.  i build; i build nice fences, but i build great buildings.  fences are easy, believe me.  i saw the other day on television people just walking across the border.  they're walking.  the military is standing there holding guns and people are just walking right in front, coming into our country.  it is so terrible.  it is so unfair.  it is so incompetent.  and we don't have the best coming in.  we have people that are criminals, we have people that are crooks.  you can certainly have terrorists.  you can certainly have islamic terrorists.  you can have anything coming across the border.  we don't do anything about it.  so i would say that if i run and if i win, i would certainly start by building a very, very powerful border.

again, the politicians talk about it and they do nothing about it.  benghazi.  oh, benghazi, benghazi.  everything is benghazi.  what happens?  nothing.

irs, e-mails.  i get sued all the time, okay.  i run a big business.  you know i've always said it's very, very hard for a person who is very successful.  i have done so many deals.  almost all of them have been tremendously successful.  you'll see that when i file my statements.  i mean you will see; you will be very proud of me, okay.  but i've always said, and i said it strongly, it's very hard for somebody that does tremendous numbers of deals to run for politics, run for political office, any office, let alone president.  because you've done so much; you've beaten so many people; you've created so many--  look, obama, what did he do?  no deal.  he never did a deal.  he did one deal.  a house.  and if you did that house you'd be in jail right now, okay.  he got away with murder.  but i can tell you, e-mails.  irs, the e-mails, thousands of them, they were lost; they were lost.  if you were in my world you would know that e-mails can't be lost; they can't be lost.  so why aren't our politicians finding out where those e-mails are?

they talk about executive orders and they talk about immigration and they talk about oh well we have to stop the border; that's the end of it.  believe me if i did something you would have a border that would be great.  but they talk about it.  and then you have a president that does an executive order.  nobody even heard of an executive order.  he does it to let people come in and nobody does anything about executive orders.  why didn't they go to court and ask for declaratory judgment--which is something that when you know somebody is going to go after you and when it's in writing, and he's been saying it for a long time; he said, i'm going to approve this and that--why didn't our republicans go in and get a declaratory judgment from the courts because you could have started the process six months earlier.  instead they have a weak lawsuit, that probably the time it's finished, i know so much about this, six, seven, eight years from now everyone's going to forget about it.  we'll be into a different mode, and our country will be further destroyed.  so we have to do something.

jobs.  china.  i mean i've made so much money fighting against the chinese.  one of the best deals i ever did was against the chinese, and they respect me for it.  and i know them.  and they say, we can't believe what we're getting away with.  we can't believe how stupid your leaders are.  they tell me that.  now they don't know i'm going to go and make a speech about it, but why not.  but they tell me that.

and by the way, especially for the folks here that sell so much--goods, i mean the goods you sell are incredible; i don't know if you've been watching what's happening with the devaluations of so many countries.  the euro, china is going crazy with the devaluation.  i never thought that they'd have the guts to do what they're doing.  they are devaluing down to nothing.  and what it's going to do is make it impossible for you to sell your product; it's going make it impossible for you to compete.  and they're getting away with it.  and they wouldn't have even done it two years ago, but now they feel we're so weak and we have so many different problems all over the world that they can do it.  but you watch this devaluation of all of it.  i mean the euro, china, mexico; everybody is devaluing.  and when you hear the dollar is getting stronger, it sounds good.  you know it's one of those things, sounds good.  be very careful.  be very careful.  because we're just going to lose more and more business to these foreign countries that really know what they are doing.  they have it set.  don't forget another thing.  china became the number one economic power a year ago.  that was unthinkable; to think that that was going to happen.  it was absolutely unthinkable.  so it happened and it's very, very sad.

now we spent $2 trillion in iraq.  we got nothing.  they don't even respect us; they don't even care about us.  until they started getting their ass kicked, and call, oh please come back and help us.  we want you out; then all of the sudden a new group forms, isis.  by the way, you know how they formed.  they took the oil.  and for those of you that know and love --there are some of you--have i been saying for four years, keep the oil.  so now isis has the oil.  and the stuff that isis doesn't have, iran is going to take.  so we get nothing.  we have $2 trillion and we have thousands of lives lost, thousands, and we have, what do we have.  i mean i walk down the streets of new york and i see so many wounded warriors, incredible people.  and we have to help those people, we have to help our vets, we have to help our military, we have to build our military.  but, and we have to do it fast; we have to do it fast.  we have incompetent people.  they put people in charge that have no clue what they're doing.  it needs money.

we have to make our country rich again so we do that, so we can save social security.  'cause i'm not a cutter; i'll probably be the only republican that does not want to cut social security.  i'm not a cutter of social security; i want to make the country rich so that social security can be afforded, and medicare and medicaid.  get rid of the waste, get rid of the fraud, but you deserve your social security; you've been paying your security.  and like, i like congressman ryan, i like a lot of the people that are talking about you know cutting social security, and by the way the democrats are eating your lunch on this issue.  it's an issue that you're not going to win; you've got to make the country rich again and strong again so that you can afford it, and so you can afford military, and all of the other things.

now, we have a game changer now, and the game changer is nuclear weapons.  we really do have to get strong, and we have to get strong fast.  we can't let iran get a nuclear weapon.  we can't do it.  can't do it.  we cannot let that happen.  you know in the old days, i would have said 100 years ago, 50 years ago, 30 years ago, pull out and let them fight each other.

here we are in syria.  we're fighting people that want to overturn syria.  think of this.  we're fighting isis, but isis wants to overturn the government.  maybe you let them fight for a little while and then you take out the one that remains, okay.  but think of it; think of it.  isis is fighting them and we are bombing the hell out of them, but we want syria to fall.  there are so many things; there are so many things.

but the one game changer that we have to be careful with, that we never really had to think about  too much before, other than a cetain number of years ago, is the nuclear.  nuclear today, it's not like soldiers in uniforms shooting rifles.  you can take out the east coast of this country, you can take out large sections of the midwest, you can take out things that were unthinkable.  the power.  and we have to be in a position where that never, ever, ever, every happens.  we've never had this before.

we have a situation in afghanistan; we're spending tremendous amounts of money there.  we're trying to do the right thing.  we have leadership, again--no leadership respects us.  you know, leadership of other places never respect stupid people, okay, that's one thing you're going to find.  the same thing is happening there.  and i never knew that afghanistan until a year ago or so, afghanistan has tremendous wealth in minerals, different, not the oil, but minerals.  and we're fighting here, and on the other side of the mountain china is taking out all the minerals.  they're taking it out.  trillion of dollars and millions of dollars of minerals.  so we're fighting here and they are taking it out, looking at us and saying thank you very much sucker.  it's really, really crazy.

so we have to rebuild quickly our infrastructure of this country.  if we don't--  the other day in ohio a bridge collapsed.  bridges are collapsing all over the country.  the reports on bridges and the like are unbelievable, what's happening with our infrastructure.

i go to saudi arabia, i go to dubai; i am doing big jobs in dubai.  i go to various different places.  i go to china.  they are building a bridge on every corner.  they have bridges that make the george washington bridge like small time stuff.  they're building the most incredible things you have ever seen.  they are building airports in qatar--which they like to say "cutter" but i've always said "qatar" so i'll keep it "qatar" what the hell.  but they're building, they're building an airport and have just completed an airport the likes of which you have never seen, in dubai an airport the likes of which you have never seen.  and then i come back to laguardia where the runways have potholes.  the place is falling apart.  you go into the main terminal and they have a terraza floor that's so old it's falling apart.  and they have a hole in it, and they replace it with asphalt.  so you have a white terraza floor and they put asphalt all over the place.  this is inside, not outside.  and i just left dubai where they have the most incredible thing you've ever seen.  in fact my pilot said oh mr. trump this is such an honor.  i said it's not an honor; they're just smart.  but you look at lax, and you look at kennedy airport, and you look at our airports generally, you look at our roadways where they're crumbling.

you look at all of the things that are bad--  i'll give you an example. and this isn't part of what i was going to say, but i ride down the highways and somebody makes those guard rails.  you know the guard rails.  the ones that sort of go like this  that are always  bent, rusted and horrible.  did you ever see more than like 20 feet which isn't corroded, or bent or the heat, if it gets too hot, it just crushes.  now they've been selling this thing for 25 years.  why doesn't someone stop them and get something that works.  because they don't know; they don't know what's happening.  somebody made a lot of money on that.  they don't know what is happening.

so we have to make our country great again.  we have to rebuild our country.  and we have a long way to go.  we are just in such serious trouble because we owe so much money.  now we owe it to the chinese, a lot of it.  we owe it to other countries.  they're the ones that hold the debt.  and then we give them money.  we have countries that we owe money to and yet we're giving them subsidies.  i just ordered thousands of television sets and between lg and samsung and i mean you know--  no american company comes to see and comes to bid.  it's south korea, and whenever they have a problem we send the battleships, we send the destroyers, we send our airplanes, we're going to protect them.  what are we doing; why aren't they paying us?  why aren't they paying us; what are we doing?  i order thousands and thousands of sets all the time, for some reason it's south korea.  you know whether it's china, south korea, but in this case televisions, south korea.  why aren't they doing something to justify what is going on?

now, we have a very important election coming up.  we have a presidential election coming up. and we have some good people.  nobody like trump of course, but these are minor details.  we have some good people.

it' can't be mitt because mitt ran and failed.  he failed.  i mean i liked him.  look--like him, dislike him--the 47% statement that he made, that's not going away.  the romneycare from massachusetts, that's not going away.  what do you think they're going to say oh we won't bring that up this time.  it's not fair because it was a long t--  that doesn't work.  but more importantly, he choked.  something happened to him in the last month.  he had that election won.  and let me tell you something.  that election, sort of like a dealmaker that can't close the deal.  i know many of those guys; they get it up to the one-yard line, they go ah, ah i can't close it.  or a golfer that can't sink the three-footer to win the tournament.  and there are many of them.  most people are like that; i mean most people are like that.  you can't give somebody another chance, 'cause actually i think this election is tougher to win than beating a failed president.  i really do.  i think beating obama would have been a much easier one than the one that's coming up, which is sad to say but true.  so you can't have romney.  he choked.

you can't have bush.  the last thing we need is another bush.  now i made that statement very strongly, and now every one says the last thing--  you know they copied it.  i'll be accused of copying the statement; that's the bad thing.  but i said it.  i was the one that said it first, and i mean it.  the last thing we need is another bush.  now, he's totally in favor of common core; that's a disaster, that's bad, it should be local and all of that.  but he's totally in favor of common core.  he's very, very weak on immigration.  don't forget--remember his statement--they come for love.  i say, what?  come for love?  you've got these people coming, half of them are criminals.  they're coming for love?  they're coming for a lot of other reasons, and it's not love.  and when he runs, you got to remember his brother really gave us obama.  i was never a big fan, but his brother gave us obama.  'cause abraham lincoln coming home back from the dead could not have won the election because it was going so badly and the economy was just absolutely in shambles that last couple of months.  and then he appointed justice roberts.  and jeb wanted justice roberts.  and justice roberts basically approved obamacare in a shocking decision that nobody believes.  so you can't have jeb bush.  and he's going to lose aside from that; he's not going to win.  so mitt and--you just can't have those two.  that's it.  that's it.  it's so simple.

so just in summing up and i just wrote a few of these little points down because it's very important.  and i watch these teleprompters, and by the way i think any president candidate that runs should not be allowed to use a teleprompter, because we got one that uses teleprompters.  and people say, oh he is so quick on his feet.  he is reading it.  i mean give me a break.  everything is read.  you don't really test the mettle of a man or a woman unless they can get up on stage and talk.  and that's what we ended up getting--the king of teleprompters.  but, so when i look at these things here i say you know what, it's so much easier, it would be so nice, just bah, pa, bah, pa, bah, bing, bing, bing.  no problems, get off stage, everybody falls asleep and that's the end of that.  but we have to do something about these teleprompters.

but in looking at these situations--  i built an incredible company.  and you'll see that.  an incredible company; a wonderful company.  i employ thousands of people and i love doing what i'm doing.  and in a certain way, i wish i weren't doing this, but our country is in such trouble and would be so easy to fix.  we have such great potential.

so if i run for president and if i win, i would totally succeed in:

creating jobs;

defeating isis and stopping the islamic terrorists--and you have to do that;

reducing the budget deficit--so important, have to do it;

securing our southern border--and i mean seriously securing it;

stopping nuclear weapons in iran and elsewhere;

saving social security, medicare and medicaid, without cutting it down to the bone because it's not fair to people that have been paying for their whole lives and other people and it's not fair to future people coming up, and we can do it;

repealing obamacare and replacing it with something far better for the people, and far less expensive, both for the people and for the country.  and believe me there are plans that are so much better for everybody.  and everybody can be covered.  i'm not saying leave 50-percent of the people out.  everybody can be c-- this plan is just a basic disaster.  nobody knows.  as bad as the website was, this is how bad the plan itself is;

fixing our country's infrastructure, our bridges, our schools, our highways, our airports.  and that, i can tell you, nobody is close to trump.  i just got the best hotel in north america.  i'm building, which is sort of interesting, think of this one.  i'm building one of the great hotels of the world on pennsylvania avenue, right opposite the white house, between the white house and congress.  right on penn.--  the  old post office site, and i got it from obama.  do you believe that?  and everybody wanted it.  so, i can't believe it myself.  but it's going to be fantastic;

and so many other things.

i know what needs to be done to make america great again.  we can make this country great again.  the potential is enormous.  and i am serious thinking of running for president because i can do the job.

thank you all very much.  thank you.  thank you.  thank you.  thank you.  thank you very much, everybody.  thank you.  beautiful.  thank you.
thank you very much. thank you. thank you. what a crowd. wow. look at that, boy. what a crowd. thank you. thank you very much. thank you. we just set a record in this building, folks, so that’s good news. that’s fantastic. thank you. i love michigan. and i was telling you come november, to be specific, november 8th, with your help we are going to win and we are going to win big. and we are going to the white house, and we are going to bring jobs back to our country, and we are going to bring jobs back to michigan. it’s going to be a victory for the people, a victory for the wage earner, the factory work. remember this, a big, big victory for the factory worker. they haven’t had those victories for a long time, a victory for every citizen and for all of the people whose voices have not been heard for many, many years. they’re going to be heard again.
it’ll be a win for the voters. not for the, pundits, not for the journalists, not for the lobbyists, not for the global special interests funding my opponent’s campaign. it’s going to be your victory. these are hard times for many in this country. i just got back from a tour of the suffering and devastation in louisiana. perhaps you can tell by the way i’m dressed, just got off the plane. it was actually incredible, the spirit of the people is incredible. the devastation, likewise, they’ve never seen anything like it, but the spirit of the people is incredible. and honestly, obama ought to get off the golf course and get down there.
we mourn for the lives lost, and we pledge our help, comfort, and support to every last person in need. to the people of louisiana, we are with you, and we will always be with you. in my visit, i saw not only the suffering of our people, but also their strength, courage, and really unbeatable spirit. their spirit will overcome. we have a lot to overcome in our country, especially the fact that our jobs are being taken away from us and going to other lands. and we’re not going to allow it to happen. and especially it’s happening right here in michigan. it’s an amazing spirit that we will need to rebuild our country. it’s that strength that we’re going to need to create the new american future our children so much deserve.
in this new… thank you. thank you very much. in this new future, millions of workers on the sidelines will be returned to the workforce. and if i’m not elected president, that will never happen. believe me, they’re talking to you, they’re playing you, but believe me, you know the answer. and i have to say that i’ve been talking about michigan and the car industry and how your businesses and plants have been ripped out of your land. and i’ve been doing it for four years to the people of michigan. other people started talking about it last week. they’re not going to do anything about it. crumbling roads, bridges and airports will be replaced with the infrastructure our country needs and deserves.
families trapped in welfare will be provided with jobs and opportunity. children stuck in failing government schools will be able to attend the school of their choice. government will become lean, effective, responsible, and honest. our border will be protected, and our children will be safe, very, very safe.

build that wall. build that wall. build that wall. build that wall. build that wall.
and we will build the wall. don’t worry about it, we will build the wall.
build that wall. build that wall. build that wall. build that wall. build that wall. build that wall. build that wall. build that wall. build that wall. build that wall. build that wall.
law and order will be restored. and the poorest places in our country will know safety and peace again. american values and cultures will be cherished, and i mean cherished, and celebrated once again. but to achieve this new american future, we must break free from the bitter failures of the past and reject the same insiders telling us the same old lies over and over and over again. no group in america has been more harmed by hillary clinton’s policies than african americans. no group, no group. if hillary clinton’s goal was to inflict pain on the african american community, she could not have done a better job. it’s a disgrace. tonight, i’m asking for the vote of every single african american citizen in this country who wants to see a better future. the inner cities of our country have been run by the democratic party for more than 50 years, their policies have produced only poverty, joblessness, failing schools, and broken homes. it’s time to hold democratic politicians accountable for what they have done to these communities. at what point do we say, “enough”? at what point do we say, “enough”? it’s time to hold failed leaders accountable for their results, not just their empty words over and over again. look at what the democratic party has done to the city as an example, and there are many others, of detroit, 40% of detroit’s residents, 40% live in poverty. half of all detroit residents do not work and cannot work and can’t get a job. detroit tops the list of most dangerous cities in terms of violent crime. number one. this is the legacy of the democratic politicians who have run this city. this is the result of the policy agenda embraced by crooked hillary clinton.
lock her up! lock her up! lock her up! lock her up! lock her up! lock her up! lock her up! lock her up! lock her up! lock her up! lock her up!
33,000 emails gone. the only way to change results is to change leadership. we can never fix our problems by relying on the same politicians who created our problems in the first place. a new future requires brand new leadership. look how much african american communities have suffered under democratic control, to those, i say the following.
to those i say the following, “what do you have to lose by trying something new like trump?” what do you have to lose?
audience: (11:14)
trump, trump, trump, trump, trump, trump, trump.
i say it again, “what do you have to lose?” look, what do you have to lose? you’re living in poverty, your schools are no good, you have no jobs, 58% of your youth is unemployed. what the hell do you have to lose? and at the end of four years, i guarantee you that i will get over 95% of the african american vote, i promise you. because i will produce, i will produce for the inner cities and i will produce for the african americans. and the democrats, the democrats will not produce and all they’ve done is taking advantage of your vote, that’s all they’ve done. and once the election’s over they go back to their palaces in washington and you know what? they do nothing for you, just remember it.
so you have nothing to lose. one thing we know for sure is that if you keep voting for the same people you will keep getting the same, exactly the same result. my administration will go to work for you as no one has ever done before. we will work, we will bring back jobs, we will work. by contrast, the one thing every item in hillary clinton’s agenda has in common is that it takes jobs and opportunities away from african american workers. it takes jobs away from all workers because your companies are leaving michigan, your companies are leaving every single state in our union. they’re going to mexico, they’re going everywhere but here.
hillary clinton supports open borders which means many thing, but it means people pour in and they take your jobs. whether you like it or don’t like it they take your jobs. her fierce opposition to school choice, you need choice, you have to get your children into good schools. you do that through competition, you need choice. her plan to massively raise taxes on small business and everyone one, $1.3 trillion tax increase, whereas i’m cutting taxes very substantially for business and for the middle class. her tremendous opposition to american energy, the opposition is fierce. and her record of giving our jobs away to many, many other countries. america must reject the bigotry of hillary clinton who sees communities of color only as votes not as human beings worthy of a better future.
hillary clinton would rather provide a job to a refugee from overseas than to give that job to unemployed african american youth in cities like detroit, who have become refugees in their own country. it’s time to get our country back to work and that includes an all out effort to help young african americans get the good paying jobs that they deserve. hillary clinton’s plan would bring in an estimated 620,000 refugees in her first term at a lifetime benefit cost of some $400 billion to our country according to the senate immigration subcommittee. hillary clinton wants to be america’s angela merkel.
by the way, for the price of supporting one refugee in the united states, we could support 12 in a safe zone in the middle east or let’s say, syria. the improved refugee screening standards i have proposed will save countless billions of dollars. it’s called extreme vetting, extreme vetting. we will invest a portion of the money saved in a jobs program for inner city youth. the african american community has given so much to this country. they fought and died in every war since the revolution, they’ve lifted up the conscience of our nation in the long march towards civil rights. they’ve sacrificed so much for the national good, yet nearly four in 10 african american children still live in poverty and 58%, as i said, of young african americans are not working, they cannot find a job.
we must do better as a country. i refuse to believe that the future must be like the past, it won’t be. our future is going to be a great future for everyone, for everyone. in a trump administration all workers of all colors will get priority for jobs in their own country, which is about time. i want higher wages for african americans, for hispanic americans and for all americans, we want higher wages. many, many workers in our country are making substantially less money today in real wages than they made 18 years ago. they’re working two jobs instead of one, they’re working much harder as they get older and it’s supposed to be the opposite. we’re going to stop it. we’re going to create great jobs and we’re going to get the wages up.
hillary clinton is a throwback to an ugly past where politicians preyed on our poorest citizens while selling them out for personal gain. promises, promises, all talk no action. all talk no action politicians. they talk, talk, talk, you vote them in with great fanfare and then they do nothing. with trump that’s not going to happen, believe me. we must turn the page on yesterday. only a change in leadership will produce a change in outcomes and we can’t take as a country four more years of obama, and that’s what you get with hillary clinton but probably worse.
in this new american future, american workers will always come first. america first, always come first. this will include a complete revitalization of the michigan manufacturing section. now, you have to understand, the michigan manufacturing sector is a disaster, is a disaster. look at your notes, look at your stats, look at what’s happening to your state. you’re losing your businesses, it’s like taking candy away from a baby. and many people in this audience right now that think you have jobs you’re going to find out very soon that your company is leaving for mexico or some other place and you’re not going to have your job very long. and if trump gets in those days are over folks, those days are over.
we will be bringing back our jobs to michigan. there will be a very big price to pay for those companies that want to leave our land, go someplace else, manufacture their goods and sell them back with no retribution, it won’t happen, there will be consequence. it won’t happen, it will not happen. michigan lost more than one in four of its manufacturing jobs since nafta. as you know, nafta, one of the worst trade bills in history, maybe, maybe, the worst trade bill ever signed in the history of the world not only in our country. it’s emptied out michigan, it’s emptied out new england, it’s emptied out in new york state, it’s emptied out so many of our great companies. they leave and they fire. we end up with devastation, we end up with unemployment, we end up with nothing. the bill was signed by bill clinton, it was supported by hillary clinton.
… supported by hillary clinton. right here in this community, you’ve lost one in seven manufacturing jobs since bill clinton put china into the world trade organization, another hillary clinton backed deal, she backs all the deals. and by the way, she will be back in trans-pacific partnership, tpp, if she is elected, just mark your words. just remember, you know it’s going to happen. she considered it the gold standard. all of a sudden, when she heard me talking about it, she said, i can’t win this one, so she went against it. she’ll go back immediately. and you saw that when the governor of virginia who’s her friend said that was going to happen.
detroit lost more than one in three manufacturing jobs following the nafta and wto agreements that were supported very strongly by my opponent. no industry has been hurt more by hillary clinton’s policies than the automobile industry, or as we call it, the car industry. it has been a total disaster. according to the bureau of labor statistics, before nafta went into effect, there were 285,000 auto workers in michigan. today, that number is down to only 160,000, and it’s going to be a lot lower because if you look at the massive plants being built right now in mexico, car plants, folks, you can kiss a lot of these jobs goodbye. but not with me, not with me, won’t happen.
in 2014, general motors announced plans to double its investments in mexico by 2018. not good. in april, 2016, ford motor company announced plans to invest another 1.6 billion constructing an auto plant in mexico. mexico will become the car capital of the world very, very quickly, and michigan is going to end up with lots of empty buildings all over the place unless you elect  president, in which case is not going to happen. the same month, fiat chrysler announced 1,300 layoffs. the list goes on and on.
we will turn it around, we will turn it around fast. we will meet with these companies and we will say, it will not be easy for you to move your plant to mexico, for you to sell your cars through what will be a very strong border, and for you not to pay tax on those cars coming in. and when we tell them that there will be a substantial tax on the cars that they make in mexico and other places, number one, they’re not going to move in the first place, and number two, if they do, our country’s going to make one heck of a lot of money.
but to save your jobs and to do all of the things that i’m talking about, we have to win on november 8th. the destruction that nafta started will be finished off if the trans-pacific partnership is approved. it will be almost, nothing’s as bad as nafta, but it will be almost as bad as nafta. we know from hillary’s closest friend that she’s planning to ram through tpp if she’s elected. she even called it, as i said, the gold standard. it’s passage would be a disaster for michigan in particular, for the car industry in particular, for the people of michigan. i won’t let it happen. according to the economic policy institute, the united states trade deficit with the proposed tpp member countries cost over one million manufacturing jobs in our country in 2015. by far the biggest losses occurred in motor vehicles and parts, which lost nearly 740, 000, think of that, 740,000 manufacturing jobs. michigan ranks first for jobs lost as a share of state workforce due to trade deficit with tpp members. just imagine how many more automobile jobs will be lost if hillary gets her wish and approves tpp. it will not be pretty. that’s why i have announced that we will withdraw from the deal before that deal can ever, ever, ever happen.
i had previously laid out a detailed seven point plan for trade reform available on my website. it includes strong protections against currency manipulation from countries like china and tariffs against any nation that cheats by unfairly subsidizing their goods, of which many of them do. my plan also includes a total renegotiation of nafta so our jobs can come back. and if we can’t make a much, much better deal than we have right now, we will walk.
i’m not in any way, shape or form an isolationist, i don’t believe in it, but we have to make great deals for our country. we’re losing in our whole trade negotiation with the oil countries over $800 billion a year, that’s a trade deficit. who negotiates these deals? we want great trade deals and we will have them. but we want trade deals that work for america that create jobs and wealth for our country, that work for the american worker. we want to shrink our almost $800 billion trade deficit. we don’t want to expand it, and it’s has been expanding for years. for years and years, you look at the charts, up, up, up, up, up.
and i say to myself so often, why don’t they do something about it? and the reason is, we have political hacks as our negotiators. we have politicians as our negotiators. we have politicians that are controlled, like hillary clinton, by her donors, her special interests and her lobbyists. and they won’t let her do what’s right for our workers and for our country. we want to be leading the world in production, exports, and manufacturing. we want jobs to leave from other countries and come into our country for a change. another major issue in this race is foreign policy. hillary clinton has made one bad foreign policy decision after another, beginning with the support for going to war in iraq. and i opposed it so strongly, nobody cared. i was a civilian, but i opposed it. i said, you will have a total destabilization of the middle east. it was such common sense. and look what happened. her tenure as secretary of state may be regarded as the most disastrous in united states history, but she’s totally without remorse. her failed decisions as secretary of state unleashed isis onto the world. but has she ever apologized for the death and destruction she has caused? no. look at the world before and after she became secretary of state.
pre-hillary, in the early 2009s, iraq was seeing a reduction in violence. libya was somewhat stable. syria was under control. the group we now know today isis was close to being extinguished. iran was being choked by sanctions. now, take a look at what we have. fast forward to the present time. after hillary, here’s what it looks like. iraq is in total chaos. syria is in the midst of a disastrous civil war and a refugee crisis now threatens europe and the united states, where we’re taking in thousands and thousands and thousands of people. isis has been unleashed onto the entire world. iran, the world’s top state sponsor of terrorism has been put on the path to nuclear weapons, was given $400 million in ransom payment cash, where they just yesterday caught obama in yet another lie.
and yet another lie, very much like, “you can keep your doctor. you can keep your plan obamacare.” a total disaster. it will be repealed. it will be replaced.
hillary clinton is a legacy of death, destruction and terrorism. america deserves a better legacy. all of you deserve a much, much better future. i am the change agent. i am the change agent. i am your messenger. and i’ve said it many times. i am nothing more than your messenger. it’s a message of strong defense, common sense. take care of our vets. great education, get rid of common core. great healthcare, get rid of obamacare. save our second amendment, which is under tremendous siege right now.
hillary clinton is the defender of the status quo, or what we have. while our country lost badly under hillary clinton, she cashed in big time. our country was losing. our people were losing, but she is cashing in. bill clinton’s speaking fees surged while hillary was secretary of state. bill was paid almost $50 million for speeches during her tenure, an increase in 44% over the previous four years. and by the way, things came out today that blow everything away. then there was all the money funneled into the clinton foundation from foreign governments and corporations. it was pay for play. boo.
yet hillary clinton, who is indifferent to the suffering she has caused, has no remorse at all. she offers no apologies for selling government favors, no apologies for unleashing isis, no apologies for her open borders, no apologies for lying about her emails or about benghazi. the only way to learn the full depth of her public corruption is to read the 33,000 emails that she deleted. and the only way to get justice in this rigged system is to show up and vote on november 8th, and vote big, big, big.
i will bring your jobs back. so are you ready to vote?
yeah.
and what about your future? is it going to be great, good or terrible?
great.
great. if you’re ready to vote for honest government and the honest government that you deserve, a trump administration will end the corruption and restore integrity to government service. remember, i’m funding my campaign. i’m spending tremendous amounts of money on running for office. i’m raising money for the republican party and the republican national committee, which i think is doing a very good job, but i’ll tell you more about that on november 8th. i’ll let you know if they do a good job or if they do not such a good job, but i think they’re going to do a great job.
no one will be above the law. in a trump administration, the state department will work for the country, not for hillary clinton’s donors. and i will work for you, and i will work for no one else. i will work for you. i will never lie to you. i will never put any other interests before you, and i will never, ever stop fighting for you. never.
the government will work for the people again. that means we are only going to admit individuals into our country who support our values, and we’re not going to issue visas where adequate screening controls take place. we are going to make sure that we have total screening. and without it, we cannot continue to have our government run like this. we will also seek to join in partnership with any nation that wishes to join us in defeating and destroying isis.
at home, taxes will go down, especially for … look, i mean, it’s going to go down for a lot of people. for business, they’re going down. businesses are going to flourish. they’re going to come pouring back. but taxes will go down, especially for middle income americans. small business rates will be lowered to 15% so we can put millions of new jobs into our poorest neighborhoods. as i said, obamacare will be repealed and replaced. voters, not special interests, will be in charge, finally. we are going to bring our country together again. we have a divided country. it’s totally divided. the era of division will be replaced with a future of unity, total unity. we will love each other. we will have one country. everybody will work together.
we are going to do it by emphasizing what we all have in common as americans. it’s time to break with the failures of the past and to fight for every last child in this country to have the better future they deserve. in my administration, every american will be treated equally, protected equally and honored equally. we will reject bigotry and hatred and oppression in all of its forms and seek a new future built on our common culture and values as one american people.
this is the change i am promising to all of you: an honest government with low taxes, a thriving economy, and a just society for each and every american. it’s time to vote for a new american future. together, we will make america wealthy again. we will make america united again. we will make america proud again. we will make america safe again. and we will make america great again. god bless you. thank you. thank you very much, michigan. thank you. (singing)
now, i am going to make the people outside angry, but they love me and i love them. we have over 1,000 people outside. we have hundreds in the second auditorium, but you people got the good real estate, right? you got the good real estate. because -- and i don't know if it's for me or if it's for the message or a combination of both but, you know, i brought back a term that hasn't been used in a long time. it's called the silent majority. there's a tremendous silent majority...that politicians have taken advantage of. i mean they have taken advantage of the people of this country long enough. they are largely incompetent except when it comes to getting re-elected. that is what they do. and look, who knows them better than me? i have contributed to everybody. and who knows them better than me? they are great at one thing, don't make any make waves, get reelected, serve it out, then get reelected again. that's it all the time. i have been watching it for so many years, and i personally am sick and tired of it. you look at the senators and the congressman. they ride around. they're like kings. they think, "great. oh, isn't it great?" they come. they make speeches. nothing ever happens. so two weeks ago on wednesday, they had the longest waits in reception rooms and reception areas in the history of the veterans administration, people waiting three days, four days, five days to see a doctor -- to see a doctor. so we are going to straighten that. that's called management. it's called management. that is all it is. we send over to our allies, if you call them that, they don't even know what they are. there is no word for them, ok? iraq isn't even a country. iraq is a bunch of corrupt people that sort of string something together. it is not a country. but we send over to our allies 2,500 humvees. so when i heard 2,500 i thought it was a typo in the "new york times". i said, "they mean 25. they mean 2.5. they mean 250, maybe." that's a lot. so these are 2500 humvees, armor plated all over. so when the bombs go off you don't lose your legs and you don't lose your life and you don't lose your arms, really great vehicles. one shot is fired and these guys run away and the enemy picks up 2,500. think of it. think of it. so we need the right thinking. and i said -- some people are saying, "what a terrible statement he made," because when we had to leave -- we had to leave -- you know, you can talk about surging but at some point we have to leave. we can't stay there forever. and if we'd loosen up these rules, we have so much oil under our own feet. we don't need them for those things because of new technologies -- new technology. so, we're going to leave. and i say, "leave but take the oil." do you remember that? did anyone ever hear that -- me say that? i'm saying it all the time. i've been saying it for years. take the oil. and i watch these guys on television , political people, many of them are with the administration and i think they mean well, but they don't have a clue. they say, "isn't that silly? mr. trump says take the oil. isn't it?" well, you know where is the oil now? iran and isis. everybody has it but us. we're the only ones who left the oil.

 show less textit's is hard to believe. we need general douglas macarthur who i thought he was great. you know, to this date, the highest academic record -- i'm big into school and academics. i love it. i went to the greatest school. you had to be really smart to get into that school, the wharton school of finance. but you have to be really smart. and that was before i was trump, you know. that was before i was trump. but you have to be really smart. that's like the hardest one but, you know, even then, by the way. but general douglas macarthur to this day was the greatest student in the history of west point plus he had the look, he had the whole deal. he was a general. i don't see it now so much. i don't want to knock the generals, but i see some of these guys come on. can we defeat is? i don't think so. and we'll use drones and we're going to use this with -- in the meantime, the enemy is saying, "ha. ding ding." and it was brutal. it turned out to be a brutal situation. i said, you know, that's great. that is camouflage. what a smart thing he is doing because he's probably going to do the opposite. well, in two weeks we attacked. we attacked from the -- it was the craziest thing i've ever seen. it was a terrible view, something that should have taken 24 hours was like months. and i said i wonder what general macarthur and general patton -- just to name two of the great ones -- are doing now in their graves? you know what they're doing? spinning. they're spinning. they're saying, "i don't believe it. i don't believe it. so we have such a great country, but we've gone down so far. china yesterday -- i'm big for the world of financial -- and i tell you what, cnn did a poll and i was through the roof on the economy. i was like really high. i had to be exactly accurate because, otherwise, they will have front page joy (ph) that  gave false. but i mean i was many times number two. i went through the roof in leadership. that's a pretty important subject, right -- leadership. i killed everybody on leadership, right? i did great on the military. and i actually think the military would be just as good as the economic for me personally. i think i'd be so good on those. oh, would i be tough? oh, these poor people. i would be creating things that nobody would be playing with us. nobody. nobody. and i don't necessarily mean soldiers. i mean -- we love our soldiers, but i mean, you know, we have weaponry that's obsolete. we have nuclear weapons. can you believe, 60 minutes does a show and the show -- the whole show was how bad a condition our nuclear weapons are in. did anybody see that show? i would say, can you write? i said even if it's true, can you believe we're putting this for the world to see, for putin to see? by the way, two weeks after that show, putin said, "they better not mess with us. we have nuclear weapons. can you imagine putin said it from russia? and the reason they did that is the president wanted the press to see how weak our nuclear capabilities. remember the telephones? they don't work. they were 40 years old and they have wires and the wires were rotting. and in order to work the telephones where our silos are and the silos were all rusty and rotting and the kids said -- nice kids (ph) -- they said, "we don't know if it works." oh, great. that means jobs. that means money. that means all of this coming out. they did a number on us. and i said when they did the last one, which wasn't long ago, like six, seven months ago, but it was a much more modest devaluation, i said i can't believe obama is allowing this to happen. and we have all the cards. i just told the press it's the greatest theft in the history of the united states what china has done to us. we have rebuilt china. our money has rebuilt china. you go over to china there bridges are being built all over the place. i mean bridges that make the george washington bridge and other bridges look small. and i am not using the george washington bridge for political purposes, ok? please. because i would do that. but it makes like the george -- like small time. they're building massive bridges, massive highways, massive roads. i went over -- i was in dubai. great place. they have an airport, it's like magic. it's the most incredible thing you have ever seen. you go to qatar. you go to places in china, many cities in china. you go to all these places. and then we go home and we land at laguardia. it's true actually. but they have these magnificent spas, everything. and i said to the head man who was taking me for a tour, i said, "this is the most beautiful airline terminal i've ever seen." it was massive. he goes, "no. no. no, donald. this is temporary. our new one is being built over there." and he pointed and there must have been 40 cranes, the longest, most beautiful thing you've ever seen. this was a tear down. and i said, "oh, we're doing it wrong." so how good is he? how good is he?

special. special. he is a special man and special person. and he has become my friend. oh, there is a lot of people here. whoa.

hello, everybody. your football team is going to have a great year.

i watch. i watch. you've got the quarterback, you've got the whole deal. i think it's going to be a very good year.

ok? and if you get into that super bowl, i will be going, all right?

so, you know, i wrote something down before, and i think it is important, because -- i love you too.

because we need unity, we have to win this election. this is truly one of the most important elections, certainly in my lifetime. because we are about to go -- we lose it, we are in the wrong direction, and maybe it's gone. supreme court justices, always remember that. but so many different levels, and when you see what happened with crooked hillary today, it was a disaster.

a disaster. she had a disaster. she lies folks, she lies badly.

so, i want to -- i just wrote this out. i wanted to say to the group, you know, i had a great time when i was in wisconsin, and i did not quite eke it out. i thought i was going to, but after that, it worked out well. you built me up, you taught me about politics.

and when i left here, i said, i think i've learned a lot.

so, i love it. i love the people. i have many friends in wisconsin. and they're -- they're incredible people. you're incredible people, i have to tell you that.

and we're going to have a lot of fun. we are going to have a lot of fun but i had to write this. this campaign is not about me or any one candidate. it is about america.

it is time for a change. we need a change. a real change, not an obama change. we don't need an obama change. we have had enough. it is time to change a rigged political system that works only for the insiders, and replace it with a government that serves the people.

have to do it. and know both sides. i've been on the other side. believe me. i actually like this side better; this is a movement. this is a movement like they may be have never seen in this country, according to even the political pundits that truly hate me, ok? this is a -- they -- oh, this is a movement that some say, most say is one of the great phenomenon's that they've ever seen in politics.

some say it's the single greatest phenomenon.

though the media doesn't want to talk about it, we have done something -- we. all of us, together. i'm a messenger; i'm only a messenger. we have done something truly historic together, standing before you as nominee for president and i'm not a politician, proudly.

i'm not part of the system. i ran against the system, and i'm probably better off running against the system.

i ran against the donors. i'm my own donor, essentially. i have a lot of money under this deal. this is a very expensive crisis, i want to tell you.

i funded -- as you know, i funded the primaries. and i'm in for under $60 million, and i'm largely funding my campaign as we go forward. in addition to that -- in addition to that, we have raised tremendous amounts of money, and much of it from small donors,$61; $61. as a republican, that doesn't happen. it happens because of what you are seeing in front of you today.

and if you remember, just prior to june, they did a story, " has not really done too well with fund raising." well, that is because i did not even know if i was getting the nomination. i'm not going to raise funds -- i would've had enough if i didn't make it. i would have said, "bye, bye, politics."

but i wanted to make sure -- so i got it. and then i started raising money for the republican party. and we raised a lot of money. we started really on june 14th, flag day, my birthday. my birthday.

and in june, we raised approximately -- think of this -- $51 million. can you imagine?

and those people couldn't believe it; they were really surprised. big headlines, you know. because they don't give me too many good headlines. i could do the greatest things. i do things that i think a fantastic.

i say, good, there is no way they cover this badly. and they cover it badly. i gently tell a woman that i love her baby, and let the baby cry. it is ok. as the baby that had a voice that was superior to pavarotti continued to cry -- i remember, i told her to stay, don't worry, ma'am.

but after about 3 or 4 minutes, and i'm trying to speak and it was in jacksonville, we had this massive, massive crowd, filled up the stadium. and the baby's screaming. so, i said, ma'am, i would like to reverse my order. perhaps you could nicely take -- take the baby out. your baby is great

i did it so nicely. she was happy. even the baby was happy. he stopped crying.

and maybe you could take the baby out, would that be possible? the whole place was cracking up. and the next day in the newspaper, it said, "trump throws baby out of arena."

terrible. now, they are very dishonest. that was a tough one, when i -- and i just had a reporter come up to me, backstage, a reporter come up -- "mr. trump, sir, but why did you throw that baby out of the area?" i said, "i was having fun. i was so nice, i was so nice. everybody likes me. the baby liked me, the mother liked me. we had a good time. i try to keep the baby in, but the baby was such -- had such a powerful voice

in fact, i want to find out who that baby is, because i want to sponsor the baby. and that baby will sing someday in philharmonic hall. i'm telling you. new york city. ok? the great philharmonic.

so, i'm not part of the system. i ran against the system. i ran against the donors, because i'm largely my own donor. i'm running against myself. that's sort of -- never thought of it that way. and against the status quo, and the status quo, we have to get rid of, because it is not working, folks, because the country is a mess.

and that is why put up a lot of money. but while the democrats nominated the candidate of special interests, and really a candidate of total corruption, i mean, you take a look at what she is doing, the republicans made history by choosing a nominee from outside of this very, very corrupt the system. it is a corrupt system.

it's a corrupt system. you want something done, they can do it for you. and that is not necessarily, and usually it isn't good for the country.

that is why we're going to be able to deliver real change, and real safety and real opportunity to all americans. we have to unite. remember that.

everything i've accomplished, i have done by putting together a really fantastic team, including governor mike pence of indiana, who has done an incredible...

done an incredible job. my wonderful staff of people that really love what we are doing, and they are working so hard. my family, friends, and it's expanding all the time.

but i need a republican senate and a house to accomplish all of the changes that we have to make. we have to make them, right?

i understand and embrace the wisdom of ronald reagan's big tent within the party, big, big tent, remember? ronald reagan, great man, great guy. remember he included reagan democrats and independents and republicans, a lot of people. we're going to have the same thing. there a lot of democrats perhaps in this room, are there a lot of democrats? raise your hands. i mean, i don't think we need too many to be honest with you, but -- so i embraced the wisdom that my 80 percent friend is not my 20 percent enemy, ronald reagan.

stated by ronald reagan, pretty good.

we will be the big tent party. we are going to have a lot of cross help. we are going to have a lot of bernie sanders people coming in because of trade, because bernie sanders knew we were being ripped off by trade. trade is a disaster with china, with japan, with mexico, with vietnam, with so many countries, with every country, every country.

we don't win at any level with anything, and as a unified party, we will lead our country to unity as well, very important. we need the unity, we have to win the election.

no we have to win it --- have to win it. otherwise, our big movement was not as big as we thought and that's not good. that's why november 8th, you've got to get everybody you know -- and you know, all this voter id nowadays, a lot of places aren't going to have voter id. now what does that mean? what does that mean? you just keep walking in and voting? so you have to be very careful, very vigilant -- you have to be careful

but we will have disagreements, but we will disagree as friends and never stop working together toward victory, and very importantly, toward real change.

so in our shared mission to make america great again, i support and endorse our speaker of the house, paul ryan.

paul ryan, he's good. he's a good man. he's a good man and he's a good guy. and we may disagree on a couple of things, but mostly we agree and we're going get it done and we're going to do a lot of wonderful things.

he's a good man. and while i'm at it, i hold in the highest esteem senator john mccain for his service to our country, in uniform and in public office, and i fully support and endorse his re-election. very important.

we'll work together. i also fully support and endorse senator kelly ayotte of new hampshire.

a state i truly love, primarily because that was my first victory, but i love new hampshire. no, i love new hampshire, one of the most beautiful places. she's a rising star and will continue to represent the great people of new hampshire so very well for a long, long time. senator kelly ayotte.

working hand-in-hand, we will grow our majority in the house and in the senate. we need that, we've got to get things done. arm in arm, we will rescue the nation from the obama-clinton disaster, which is exactly what it is, that has bled our country dry and spread terrorism unabated across the world, that's what's happening. you saw it just now, maps came out yesterday, they said isis far bigger, it's all over the place. it's all over the place. we're going to get rid of it, folks.

our military is depleted. we're going to build up our military, we are going to get others with us. believe me, we're going to get plenty of others with us. and speaking of others, wouldn't it actually be wonderful if we could get along with russia? wouldn't that be nice?

they talk so big and so brave and so tough, they're the tough ones. you know, hillary's real tough, give me a break. wouldn't that be great? we get along with russia, we go out together with others and we knock the hell out of isis, wouldn't that be great?

together we will lead our country back to prosperity, security and peace. ok? when you look at the world and what's happened -- so we have the queen of corruption, she's the queen of corruption. she is a disaster. i said before, if crooked hillary clinton becomes president, terrorism will destroy the inner workings of our country. believe me, they are loving it.

she wants to have 550 percent more people coming in from syria and that region into our nation. and we don't know who they are, we don't know where they come from really, we don't know if they're isis, some will be. and look at the damage that's done in san bernardino with a couple -- probably he became radicalized by her -- a couple, and these were friends of theirs. these were people that gave a party in celebration of the birth of their child and they were gunned down, 14 people killed, many, many injured.

take a look at orlando -- take a look at orlando, how disgusting that was. take a look at the world trade center and so many other places. go to the probably toughest gun laws anywhere in the world, go to paris and take a look at that, 130 people gunned down. you know, if people had guns, on the other side where the bullets are flying in the other direction, like you sir, you sir, you and you, ma'am.

first of all, if they knew guns were in the room, they probably wouldn't have gone there. there were no guns. they were just sitting ducks, 130 people. in san bernardino you had 14 people.

but in paris, just like this, boom -- get over here, boom -- get over here, boom -- 130 people with many still in the hospital, many so gravely wounded. it's horrible. and if they had bullets flying in the other direction, maybe they wouldn't have shown up, and if they did, i'll tell you what, you wouldn't have had that kind of carnage. you would have had people lying on the other side of the floor instead.

so hillary clinton wants to do major damage, as you know, to our second amendment. hillary clinton wants to put judges -- she wants to put justices of the supreme court -- she's going to make them nice and liberal, wait until -- wait until you see what that does to your rights. wait until you see what that does to your second amendment. you will not recognize it, you will not recognize it. national rifle association, nra, endorsed me.

they're great people, wayne -- they're great people, chris, they love this country. they endorsed me very early and it's really a -- it's really an honor. i'll tell you what, they are phenomenal people when you get to know them. they love the country -- you know, they love the country. they take a lot of heat, but they love the country, i'll tell you that right now.

and i heard mike, governor pence, talking about 1.2 growth -- 1.2 percent growth, the lowest in memory since the 1940's. when you think about it, it's the lowest. so a lot of differences between all of us, but i thought i would mention -- because i've known hillary clinton over the years -- i know her -- and she makes statements. she makes statements and they are statements coming out of her playbook.

well, let's see, "we can't get them for this -- can't get them for this." i've always heard that i have the best temperament, people tell me i have the best temperament, i have a temperament to win. we got to win. we got to win

she said not so long ago, "i don't like 's tone". now, she is reading it off teleprompters only. "i don't like 's tone." and i said, you know, "we need a tough tone today. we have people -- we need a kind tone, but we need a tough tone."

we have people being beheaded all over the middle east and other places. we have crime that is rampant. we have people in the middle east being drowned in steel cages. this is like medieval times, and she is worried about my tone.

so they chop off heads and they drown people, and they bury people in sand. and then they ask me, "mr. trump, sir," -- at one of the debates in which i won, i'm very happy about that -- "mr. trump, sir, how do you feel about waterboarding?" i'm seeing chopped off heads, drowned people, burying in sand -- i said, "i'm absolutely ok with it, let me tell you."

can you imagine what the enemy must say -- can you imagine the enemy -- isis in this case -- can you imagine what they must say as they spent the day chopping off the heads of christians -- "come back, get together and start talking -- and they say waterboarding is not allowed in the united states -- by the united states, waterboarding is not allowed."

folks, we better get smart and tough and we are playing games with hillary, we are playing games. it is just games, she is not the right person and everybody knows it. her single greatest achievement is being caught in a crime and getting away with it.

this is true, 33,000 e-mails.

so i wrote this before on the way over to another rally at also a very nice place that's very full and very nice in iowa. and we love iowa don't we, yes? right?

i thought it was accurate, unstable -- and she is, she is unstable. hillary clinton lacks the judgment that bernie sanders had. you just have to pay attention, as soon as he said it, i started writing notes.

"she has bad judgment. she lacks the judgment, temperament and moral character to lead this country. plus, she is a weak person." we don't need a weak person. he just said, "plus, she is a criminal."

she is a dangerous liar who has disregarded the lives of americans, and who has put all of us at great risk while supporting economic policies that have destroyed our economy. we have a long way to go.

she is unhinged, she's truly unhinged, and she is unbalanced, totally unbalanced. and you can see, in the words of a secret service agent who just wrote a book, i bought the book, i wanted to see what he had to say; "she simply lacks the integrity and temperament to serve in the office."

"from my bottom of my soul" he said, "i know this to be true." he was there. "her leadership style, volcanic impulsive as it is, disdainful of the rules set for everyone else hasn't changed a bit. she's unqualified to become president." and she really is, and bernie said that too.

thank you. what great people. wow.

no, but it is true, no games, it is true. in one way she is a monster, ok? look at what happened, look at her history. in another way, she is a weak person, she is actually not strong enough to be president. so she's got both, but she is not strong enough to be president.

she will be a be a disaster. she will be so bad for our country, and i'm not just talking about justices of the supreme court. she will be so bad for our country and we can't let it happen. we can't let it happen.

you know, mike pence told me a story, and maybe i should not say it, but i found it interesting, but of the reasons -- i guess the primary reason that he's in politics is because he watched the crookedness of the clintons when they were in the white house. and he said "he ran, he ran again and he ran again, and he won." you have to hand it to him, this is the guy that does not give up. he does not quit. he never ever quits.

but he watched the clintons -- and i'm sure they will be thrilled to hear that -- but that actually got him into politics, which is interesting.

so then we make these horrible deals; iran deal, horrible deal, we got $150 billion -- and how about $400 million -- think of it, $400 million in cash, different currencies, different denominations. now, lot of people say that money went toward terror

i'm nicer than that, see, i don't have that horrible thought process that some people have in this room have. i say, some of it went to terror, but a lot of it went into their bank accounts, believe me, that's the way it is. it went into their pockets, can you imagine these guys sitting there with $400 million in cash? you think they're giving that money to terror, they are giving that money to them and i guess terror got some of it, but most of it they kept.

i mean, the concept of paying $400 million in cash is mind- boggling. i mean, you wouldn't think -- who can authorize such a thing? where did they get it? what did they do, go to a bank teller and say, "give me $400 million in cash? i want to in euros, i want it in swiss francs, wrap it up, we will come back in 10 minutes."

i mean, it is just inconceivable. so we are witnessing a horror show in this country and throughout the world. you look at what is going on throughout the world with these same people, these people funding terror -- these people are funding terrorism. for us to have given $400 million to basically free our hostages.

now, obama, just like he lied about obamacare which was a tremendous lie, that was a tremendous lie, remember? "you can keep your plan, you can keep your doctor." really? how many people have been able to keep the doctor or their plan?

keep your plan, keep your doctor -- not working that way, folks. it is a disaster. by the way, it is going to be repealed and replaced 100 percent.

and -- and honestly, i hope i win, because we will do a great job. we are going to make america great again. we're going to make america great again.

but i actually think that regardless of who wins, obamacare is going to fold in any event. it is so expensive. people can't afford it and the country can't afford it. other than that, it is just wonderful. so, in texas, they just had almost a 60 percent increase. now the increases are starting to come out. the big increase is going to be announced on november 1st. the election is november 8th. folks, they want to delay it, because it is election-changing. it is a mess.

it is election changing, and they want to change it. and we can't let that happen.

because the numbers -- and i can see some of the numbers already -- the numbers are going to be astronomical. they are going to be astronomical. they're going to be so big, so horrible, and the health care, you know, the plan is terrible. it's terrible. and we're going to take care of everybody, but we're going to end up with a great plan that costs much less money for the people and much less money for the country.

this plan is a total rip. it does not work, so it's going to fall, because economically, it is a disaster for the country, too.

but what about people where they said they had a 30, 40, 50, 60 percent increase? and it's going to be worse than that, i predict on november 1st.

so, we'd better get smart and we'd better start thinking properly.

now, i want to talk about what is going on at the borders, because money...

oh, we're going to build it.

so, listen, so we have people coming to our country that should not be coming to our country . we have thousands and thousands of people from certain terrorist states, from certain parts of the world that we are allowing to come into our country.

most of the politicians, almost all of them don't even know where they are, where they are being put, they know nothing about these people. this could be the great trojan horse of all time. and hillary wants thousands more to come in over and above obama. right?

so, tall -- and the wall is getting taller every day.

if you think of this, i just wrote this, the obama-clinton foreign-policy has handed huge portions of iraq, libya and syria to isis. huge portions. it has undermined stability in egypt, and you know what they have to do over there. and empowered iran as never before. iran, three years ago was -- was dying. in fact, when they were marching in the streets, if obama would have just encouraged them a little more, it would have been taken over by the people.

but obama played ball with the thugs that are running it right now. think of this, think of this. look, look. we're making a deal, and the deal is not made, and they are dancing in the streets of iran saying how stupid the americans are to be making this deal.

the leaders, and in particular the leader of iran, is calling us stupid, and the deal means nothing.

and yesterday, i think he just said that the united states is essentially nothing.

this is our -- this is our great, great partner.

but when you have somebody -- if i was making this deal, and if the other side was bragging about it, the deal wasn't made, i'm not making that deal. i'm not making it. i'm walking.

but we kept it going, and we should have never ever started negotiating that deal until we had our hostages back. ok?

we should have walked. we should have doubled up the sanctions and walked. and they would have -- and i say it. before the plane reached new york city or washington, you could just turn it around, because they'll call you, they'll say, let's go. take your hostages.

but when you think about it, you probably read today and yesterday, one of the hostages was waiting for a very long period of time. now, obama said that it had nothing to do with the hostages. that he would not do that for kidnappers.

he would not do that for kidnapping. ok? no, no, think of that. you have got to think about it. he wouldn't do it -- now, it was the same day, right, same day. we have to be exactly accurate, because they'll catch us, right? same day.

the money came in, and one of the hostages, a good guy, i saw him interview on television. good guy, hard time. btu didn't he say he waited forever, he waited. and somebody said, nope, we are waiting for either something or a plane to come in.

and here obama stands up yesterday, and for seven minutes is telling us one thing had nothing to do with the other. just a lie. you know, at least be truthful.

and we're talking about the same day, $400 million, and we could have had something that would have been a much better deal. and you know what, i'm all in favor of deals when it gets to nuclear. but we could have made it -- we should have walked. and we should have walked with $150, too; we have said, sorry, we don't have the money, can't pay. we don't have the money. we owe almost $20 trillion

i'm sorry, fellas, we love you, we think you're the greatest guys on earth. but we can't give you the money. we don't have it. and they will get angry and they will be upset, and two days later, you'll be back negotiating.

you just saved yourself $150 billion, right? hundred and -- $150 billion.

so, we have terrorists pouring into our country, we have people coming in. i don't know if you saw this, in maine -- and maine knows, because maine is -- i was up there yesterday -- a great place. a great governor, great governor. paul is doing a great job.

and i think the most important issue facing civilization right now is radical islamic terrorism. and we have a president that refuses to use the term, and we have crooked hillary who does not want to use it. now, she's being forced to use it by me.

did you notice she gave a speech, she said, i will use it. she called it, i think, radical islam. but she said, i will use it. i will. just like the trans-pacific partnership. she called it the gold standard. it is a horror show.

it's almost as bad or maybe it's going to worse than nafta, signed by her husband, which cleaned out many of the states in our country, cleaned them out from manufacturing. moved to mexico and other places. nafta, a total disaster.

nafta, signed by bill clinton. he never suffered the ravages, because he signed it, then he got out and other people did suffer with it.

but we are going to renegotiate nafta, and if they don't want to make a great deal for us so we get our jobs back, at least a lot of them, if we can't make a great deal -- and she can't do that, by the way, if she wanted to.

number one, her donors would not let her. her special interests would never let her. her lobbyists would never let her.

number three, she could not do it anyway. even if she wanted to.

but we're going to renegotiate. and did you hear her the other day? after years of saying how wonderful it is, even though you look at new england, and you look at new york state and you look at pennsylvania and ohio, if you look at a lot of other places, one of the reasons i won indiana so big -- well, one of the reasons was the great bobby knight, ok?

bobby knight in indiana.

that's gold standard right? as she said about tpp. but one of the reasons i won was because carrier air conditioning was moving to mexico from indiana, and they let go of 1,400 people.

and i've been talking about this, and i know how to stop it, and you've heard me before, so easy to stop. there have to be consequences when mexico takes our companies. and not only mexico; there have to be consequences when china devalues its currency so that our companies can no longer compete with china, even though we make better product.

i have friends who are manufacturers. we make better product. they can't get their product into china and when a few times arise where they can, they have to pay an incredible tax, beyond what anybody would even think costs. but yet, we open our doors and just throw away your stuff, and we lose our jobs and it is very, very said.

but look, as many know, a major destination -- maine, has become a major destination for somali refugees. we admit hundreds of thousands of refugees into the united states from many of the most dangerous and unstable regions in the world. and you are getting them here too folks, you just don't know it because you just don't know.

anybody in this room -- anybody in this room from a terror territory? all right, a practice -- and this is a practice which will continue under hillary clinton except it will expand five, six, seven fold. i don't get it. i mean, i know they will vote democrat, ok, that's what i know, but they will not be voting for a long time.

i just -- i don't get it, how can anybody even think this way? now, the washington times reported, "of the somali refugees -- the program in minnesota -- that the effort to resettle large groups of somali refugees is having the unintended consequence of creating an enclave of immigrants with high unemployment that is both stressing the state safety net" -- tremendous problems for safety -- "and creating a rich pool of potential recruiting targets for the islamic terror groups

aren't we smart? we are having this problem across our refugee and immigration programs. here are some of the examples -- i will give you a few examples, and this came out of the senate subcommittee just recently. "the boston bombers" -- remember those horrible, disgusting people? "the boston bombers arrived through the political asylum process.

the younger brother applied for citizenship and was naturalized on september 11, 2012. the older brother had a pending application for citizenship." and look what happened, we took them in. look what happened, aren't we smart?

the moroccan national who came to the united states on a student visa was arrested for plotting to blow up a university in a federal courthouse. great. a uzbek refugee living in idaho was arrested and charged with providing support to a terrorist organization in the form of teaching terror recruits how to build massive and very dangerous bombs. we let him in.

an immigrant from syria who later applied for and received u.s. citizenship was accused by federal prosecutors of planning to go to a military base in texas and kill three or four american soldiers, execution style if possible -- more than that, if at all possible.

a college student who immigrated from somalia who later applied and received u.s. citizenship, attempted to blow up a christmas tree lighting ceremony in oregon.

an immigrant from afghanistan who later applied for and received u.s. citizenship, and a legal permanent resident from the philippines were convicted for plotting to join al qaida and the taliban in order to kill as many americans as possible -- as many as possible.

an iraqi immigrant who later applied for and received u.s. citizenship was arrested for lying to federal agents about pledging allegiance to isis, his travels to syria, and how many americans he wanted to kill.

two immigrants from pakistan who later applied for and received u.s. citizenship were sentenced to decades long prison sentences for plotting to detonate a bomb -- and a very big bomb, in the middle of new york city.

an immigrant from yemen who later applied for and received u.s. citizenship was arrested for trying to join isis. he was also charged with attempting to illegally buy firearms to try to shoot as many american military personnel as possible.

all right folks. so, i just say, what are we doing? what are we doing? and hillary clinton wants more and more to pour in. you can almost say, you know, politics aside, whether you are a democrat, whether you are a liberal, a republican, a conservative; what are they doing? i don't care who you are, what the hell are they doing?

so we are going to have strong borders, our southern border is going to be very powerful. we are going to stop the drugs from pouring into wisconsin and every place else.

the heroin epidemic is beyond belief. in new hampshire, a great place, that is where i realized the extent of what is going on. i met with the people of new hampshire and they tell me, "the biggest problem they have is heroin." i said, "it can't be with the beautiful lakes and streams, it so beautiful." right, and their biggest problems heroin. i said, "you have to be kidding, that can't be right, " and it was. their youth is being poisoned. and then you go to massachusetts, and you go to north carolina, and south carolina, and you come here, you come here -- i just left iowa, you go to iowa and you see the tremendous problems they have with heroin and drugs that pour in from the southern border. and look, here's the story, we are going to have strong borders. we are going to have a wall, it will be a big and powerful wall -- a big powerful wall.

you know that hillary clinton wanted a wall a number of years ago? she wanted a wall. and the primary research, as we understand it, looking back, not that long ago, she wanted a wall. you know, walls do work folks, all you have to do is ask israel. all you have to do is ask some of the nations that are in europe right now that are building walls.

you know, it's sort of interesting, obama talks about, "there will be no wall." but in the white house, which he just said, which is true, they want to build essentially a wall, they want to build a fence a lot bigger, and a lot higher, and a lot stronger.

you know, it is interesting. i say, "don't build that fence right, don't build that fence," because they say, "walls don't work" -- fences don't work, don't build that fence."

when hillary doesn't want to let you have your guns, she is surrounded by people like this that have more firepower on them than any human beings on earth, and i think she doesn't want to have guns. i think that all of her bodyguards and all of her secret service should immediately give up their weapons.

ok, i mean it. they should immediately give up their weapons. they should immediately give up those weapons and if somebody comes at you with a gun, you just try to talk them out of it, i guess. you got to do some quick talking.

you got to do some quick talking, hillary. i don't think even hillary with her phony lies and disgusting habits, i don't think hillary could get away with that one.

so we are going to have a little contrast. and i did this very quickly but it is so simple, hillary wants to raise taxes, trump is going to lower taxes very substantially, the biggest tax decrease of all on business and on person.

hillary wants to significantly expand regulations. trump is going to get rid of many, many, many regulations.

which, by the way, are stopping your businesses both small and big from succeeding, from expanding and more than anything, from starting. you can't start a business today the regulations are so onerous and horrible.

hillary wants to shut down energy production.  trump wants to expand it significantly. and we'll start paying off our debt.

hillary wants to essentially abolish the second amendment, take away your right.   will protect it more so than any president that has ever served.

crooked hillary wants far left activities judges forced over there by bernie and by pocahontas.

who will destroy our constitution. i want judges who will support and defend our constitution.

as close, by the way, to justice scalia who was great as we could get, ok?

hillary wants to open our borders, just open them up because her special interests and donors want it that way. there are reasons, i understand that. i want to totally secure our borders. but i want people to come in. but they come in through a process and they come in legally.

hillary wants to invade foreign countries. you ever see the one where she says " with the nuclear" -- i'm -- i didn't want the war in iraq. and i'm on record. i didn't want the war in iraq. i didn't want all of -- what they've done. and i said, if you read esquire magazine from a long time ago, you'll see everything i said was exactly right. it's going to de-stabilize the middle east.

i said the meanest, toughest group of people, the people that hate the united states and its people the most, they're going to take it over. that's exactly what's happening. they're taking over the oil, they're taking over the land, they're taking over everything. i didn't want it, but i'm always being accused like the war hog they think i'm a tough guy, the war hog. right?

they think she wants to be tough with russia. so she said well,  likes putin. i don't know putin, folks. i don't know. i hope i like him, i hope he likes me because i'd love to get along with russia. ok?

love to. but i don't know. but she goes ,  -- think about it -- wants to befriend putin and other things, she said right? and i'm saying to myself what's wrong with that? that's good.

but she's going to be the tough one, see? she's going to be the tough one. she's going to play with nuclear weapons, you know? they have all the nukes, nice nukes. she's going to be the tough one.

i'll tell you what, you put her in the office of the president -- you know, she hates putin and putin hates her, right? that's what i hear. no, no -- putin probably doesn't respect her more than anything else. but putin hates her. but she's going to be tough. we're going to be tough with russia -- oh, we're going to be tough, right? let me tell you, we're in a different world today, folks. we're in a different world.

but she makes it sound like i'm this tough guy that will have a temperament. you know, she uses the word -- you know who gave her the word? her people that write the speeches, we'll say trump with a temperament.

they said trump in a speech with tweets. i've got -- i've got between facebook and twitter like almost 21, 22 million people. it's an asset, it's an asset. i tweet well. but -- but she said -- she made the statement during her speech, you know, i heard it barely because i was falling asleep, you couldn't watch it.

all right. so remember that one. hillary wants to invade foreign countries. look at libya. look at that. we did a great job there. you know, a spot hit on gaddafi maybe, but i mean even that, what the hell do we get out of this? it's a disaster. then you have benghazi, then you have isis -- then you have isis -- then you have isis taking over the oil, large portions of the oil. and it's some of the finest oil in the world. and you have isis grabbing it.

we don't know what we're doing. we have people that don't know what we're doing. we have people that militarily -- in fact, they said well, who is your military consultants? and i give them names. but they're not working now, you know they're not working now. and i said of course they're not working now, look what working now people have gotten us. havoc, who the hell wants the people who are working now? i mean...

you know, a lot of it's common sense and a lot of it's instinct and she has very bad judgment, she's got no instinct whatsoever. and when i was asked on one of the big networks about nato, they said what do you think of nato? now, you know it's not like it was my primary subject in all fairness. i've only been doing this for 12 months. now, it's actually almost 14 months, hard to believe, right?

but nato -- so i said i know enough. and sometimes knowing a little is better than knowing too much. you understand, you can't see the forest through the trees, right? so i said nato in my opinion is obsolete because it's not covering terrorism. obsolete for that reason and also you have many countries that aren't paying their fair share, they're not paying what they're supposed to be paying.

and we're protecting those guys and we're supposed to get into world war iii for all these countries that aren't paying their fair share. and even the commander of nato -- and i so respect what he did. he came out the other day and he said  is right, we have cut you see that's right did you see the letter -- the big story?  is right. i'm sure obama was thrilled when he saw that.

 is right; you have countries that aren't paying. and he said how he goes in and he talks to them. he says look, you've got to pay your bills. i have budgets -- which is true. and i have to go back to congress and i have to say what's happening.

they don't pay their bills though because people don't ask properly. and they probably say to the president or whoever may handle the country. "sir, we owe the united states millions of dollars. we're ready to pay." oh, have they asked for the money? no. they'll pay, ok

but i will say the commander of nato said i was right. and then you have these people back here -- stupid people -- right here. they said  -- now they're the worst. they're the worst. they said  --  doesn't like nato. he is going to abandon nato. that's not what i said. i said they've got to pay. they've got to pay.

now, you have to walk. you may have to walk. but they've got to pay. we're going to get in world war iii for all these countries that are laughing at the stupidity of the united states, right? no, they've got to pay. and they probably will, in all fairness.

but hillary said about japan -- because japan, we're defending japan you know that, right? now, in all fairness before i came alone put yourself back three years ago. did anybody know that we defend japan? raise your hand who knew. all right, there's about 12 percent.

not bad. i think some of you are lying, ok? i think some of you are related to hillary rodham clinton. i think some of you are lying. but we defend japan and a man comes up, general or something, a few months ago, i remember so vividly. and he said at a news conference because they were embarrassed because i kept saying they've got to pay their way. and if they don't -- if they don't, you always have to be prepared to walk you have to do that.

you know, we don't want to do that, i understand the reason. it'd be nice to have them but you know this isn't again 40 years ago. we owe $20 trillion. we're defending all these -- we defend japan. we defend germany. we defend saudi arabia. you think they have the money to pay -- how about we have military bases that we rent -- we pay rent to saudi arabia to protect them? no. no, think of it. think of it, think of the stupidity. think of the stupidity. so this general comes up, has a news conference a few months ago. and he said, "mr. trump doesn't understand that japan is paying 50 percent of the cost to defend them."

so a reporter goes up who i think is there and said to me, "mr. trump, we'd like your comment. they say that japan is paying 50 percent of the cost to defend." and i said why aren't they paying 100 percent? the reporter said, ok." not a bad question. now, here's the problem with the hillary -- hillary rotten clinton. here's the problem.

here is -- that's why she changed her last -- that's why she doesn't want to use the name anymore, because everybody was saying that. i don't know. i've been saying it.

but look, here is -- here is why it doesn't work for hillary. she saw that i said that we have to get reimbursed for our costs, at least, right?

japan, economic behemoth. germany -- see how well they're doing -- economic behemoth. saudi arabia, nothing but money.

they were making $1 billion a day with their high oil prices, now they're making a fortune, the same thing. economic behemoth. why are defending them, and why aren't we being fully reimbursed? now, if we do that, your budget already is starting to look real good, ok. you know, you have budgets, so we losing our assurance; we have an $800 billion trade deficit, folks.

we trade with companies. we have a deficit with other countries, think of it -- $800 billion a year. trade deficit. do we make the deals? no.

with china, $505 billion trade deficit. and they cheat us because they devalue their currency all the time. whenever it gets a little bit tough, devalue, devalue, and our companies can't compete with that. right?

so, here's the thing. so, hillary says about japan, how dare he not not stay with our allies, how dare he not do that?

i will never abandon our allies, ever, ever, ever. now, how do you negotiate when you're telling somebody will never going to leave? we may have to leave.

look, japan has problems because you have the maniac in north korea making missiles. but i mean, you know, so we'll get it.

now, south korea, it is an economic behemoth. you can't buy television that is not made in south korea, except sony, which is made in japan, which has sort of lost its way. whether it is lg or samsung. i order thousands of television sets; you can't buy them in the united states. i'd love to. show me one company. one of the pundits said, they do make them. there's a company.

and he showed me, it's a little company. what they do is, all the parts come in for -- from all over the world; they put them together, and they give you a television that doesn't work and nobody ever heard of it.

and then i put it into a luxury hotel, and everybody complains, right?

so, you can't say to people when you're negotiating -- because we're talking about tremendous billions and billions of dollars. you can't say to people -- you can't say to people when you're negotiating, we'll never leave you.

think of this, we're going to never leave you; we love you, we'll never leave you. could you pay more? no, we're not going to pay anymore. you're not going to leave us. why should we pay more?

so, there's a chance we'll have to leave. and there's a chance that, you know, japan will have to take over this monster and figure it out. we're very far away. it's very expensive.

you know, we have a treaty with japan. and if the united states is attacked, they don't have to do anything. but if japan is attacked, we have to go in there will our full force and might, and who the hell knows what's going to happen, right

world war iii, who knows what's going to happen. but if we're attacked, they don't have to do anything. you tell me, who makes these deals?

it's like sergeant bergdahl, right? so, we trade a dirty, rotten traitor where five or maybe even six people were killed when he deserted, and we knew that they were killed and we knew that he was a traitor. we trade for five of the greatest killers, the greatest killers in the middle east, the five people that they wanted the most. that is our deal.

so, we get a traitor and they get five people that are right now, most of them, already back on the battlefields trying to kill everybody, including us.

no more, folks. that is called the five for one president. that's -- that is the same guy that made the deal for $400 million. the other guys couldn't leave the airport, the hostages. and then all of a sudden, they were able to leave.

and then you watched him yesterday saying that, can you believe it? this had nothing to do with that. ok? just a coincidence. no, no, just a coincidence -- no. you know, she is unfit to serve as president for a lot of reasons. he is unfit also. he has done so bad. he has been so incompetent. we have doubled our debt during his -- think of it. over the years of our country -- over the years of our country, he gets in, and in eight years by the time his term is up, we will have doubled our national debt.

think of it. so, we have to win this election. this is a very important election. i do not need to do this, folks, believe me. i could be elsewhere right now, i love being with you.

but i could be elsewhere. i could be -- i might be in wisconsin, just a different location. ok? but i felt i had to do it. i want to give back. i will get back give back, i'm going to give back. i'm going to give back.

i want to give back. because our country does not win anymore.

our country does not win anymore. and it is not going to win with crooked hillary clinton. not going to win. it's not going to win. she does not know how to win. our country is not going to win with her.

we're going to be worse than we are with obama. i mean, if you want four more years of what is going on, isis, all over the place, isis expanding.

and by the way, our policeman are great, great people.

and we are not going to allow our policeman to be shot down anymore. anymore. no more. no more.

so, november 8th, you have a big election. i promise you this, if i win, we're going to start winning again. we are going to win on trade, we're going to win with our military, we're going to take out isis, we are going to win for our veterans who have been totally mistreated.

our veterans are great. we have a great plan for the veterans. we're are going to win for our veterans, first time, maybe ever.

we are going to win on trade deals. we are going to make the finest, we are going to bring our jobs back. we're not going to make it easy for these companies to leave and fire everybody. it going to be very, very expensive when they do it.

believe me, it's going to be very, very expensive. they're going to say, you know what? maybe we'll stay wisconsin, ok? maybe we will stay.

no, it's going to be very, very hard. we're going to have strong borders, we're going to have the wall. mexico is going to pay for the wall 100 percent, 100 percent.

we are going to get rid of obamacare. we're going to get rid of common core, we're going to bring our education -- local. we're going to have local education.

we're going to appoint great supreme court justices.

and folks, we're going to start winning again. we're going to win at every level. we're going to win so much, you're going to get tired of winning, i'm telling you.

you're going to be begging me, mr. president -- you will send your great quarterback, right? he will come to the white house. everybody respects him. he'll come to the white house, and he'll say, mr. president, the people of wisconsin, they can't stand winning so much.

could you tone it down just a little bit? i will say, i just can't do that. we are going to win more, and more and more, we're going to win at every level.

but we are going to win. we are going to make america great again. we're going to make america safe again.

thank you very much, everybody. thank you. thank you. thank you for the invitation to speak to you today. it's wonderful to be in detroit.

we now begin a great national conversation about economic renewal for america. it's a conversation about how to make american great again for everyone, and especially those who have the very least.

the city of detroit is where our story begins

detroit was once the economic envy of the world. the people of detroit helped power america to its position of global dominance in the 20th century.

when we were governed by an america first policy, detroit was booming. engineers, builders, laborers, shippers and countless others went to work each day, provided for their families, and lived out the american dream.

but for many living in this city, that dream has long ago vanished.

when we abandoned the policy of america first, we started rebuilding other countries instead of our own. the skyscrapers went up in beijing, and in many other cities around the world, while the factories and neighborhoods crumbled in detroit. our roads and bridges fell into disrepair, yet we found the money to resettle millions of refugees at taxpayer expense.

today, detroit has a per capita income of under $15,000 dollars, about half of the national average. 40 percent of the city's residents live in poverty, over two-and-half times the national average. the unemployment rate is more than twice the national average. half of all detroit residents do not work.

detroit tops the list of most dangerous cities in terms of violent crime—these are the silenced victims whose stories are never told by hillary clinton, but victims whose suffering is no less real or permanent.

in short, the city of detroit is the living, breathing example of my opponent's failed economic agenda. every policy that has failed this city, and so many others, is a policy supported by hillary clinton.

she supports the high taxes and radical regulation that forced jobs out of your community…and the crime policies that have made you less safe…and the immigration policies that have strained local budgets...and the trade deals like nafta, signed by her husband, that have shipped your jobs to mexico and other countries… and she supports the education policies that deny your students choice, freedom and opportunity.

she is the candidate of the past.

ours is the campaign of the future.

this is a city controlled by democratic politicians at every level, and unless we change policies, we will not change results.

today, i will outline my economic vision. in the coming weeks, we will be offering more detail on all of these policies, and the ones we have already rolled out can be viewed on my campaign website.

our opposition, on the other hand, has long ago run out of ideas. all hillary clinton has to offer is more of the same: more taxes, more regulations, more bureaucrats, more restrictions on american energy and american production.

if you were a foreign power looking to weaken america, you couldn't do better than hillary clinton's economic agenda.

nothing would make our foreign adversaries happier than for our country to tax and regulate our companies and our jobs out of existence.

the one common feature of every hillary clinton idea is that it punishes you for working and doing business in the united states. every policy she has tilts the playing field towards other countries at our expense.

that's why she tries to distract us with tired political rhetoric that seeks to label us, divide us, and pull us apart.

my campaign is about reaching out to everyone as americans, and returning to a government that puts the american people first.

here is what an america first economic plan looks like.

first, let's talk tax reform.

taxes are one of the biggest differences in this race.

hillary clinton—who has spent her career voting for tax increases—plans another massive job-killing $1.3 trillion-dollar tax increase. her plan would tax many small businesses by almost fifty percent.

recently, at a campaign event, hillary clinton short-circuited again—to use a now famous term—when she accidentally told the truth and said she wanted to raise taxes on the middle class.

i am proposing an across-the-board income tax reduction, especially for middle-income americans. this will lead to millions of new good-paying jobs.

the rich will pay their fair share, but no one will pay so much that it destroys jobs, or undermines our ability to compete.

as part of this reform, we will eliminate the carried interest deduction and other special interest loopholes that have been so good for wall street investors, and people like me, but unfair to american workers.

tax simplification will be a major feature of the plan.

our current tax code is so burdensome and complex that we waste 9 billion hours a year in tax code compliance.

my plan will reduce the current number of brackets from 7 to 3, and dramatically streamline the process. we will work with house republicans on this plan, using the same brackets they have proposed: 12, 25 and 33 percent. for many american workers, their tax rate will be zero.

while we will develop our own set of assumptions and policies, agreeing in some areas but not in others, we will be focused on the same shared goals and guided by the same shared principles: jobs, growth and opportunity.

these reforms will offer the biggest tax revolution since the reagan tax reform, which unleashed years of continued economic growth and job creation.

we will make america grow again.

in the days ahead, we will provide more details on this plan and how it will help you and your family. it will present a night-and-day contrast to the job-killing, tax-raising, poverty-inducing obama-clinton agenda.

the state of new york has already lived through hillary clinton's failed leadership. the washington post just published a devastating article on hillary clinton's broken promises. she pledged 200,000 jobs for upstate new york as senator. but what happened? the washington post writes, and i quote: "upstate job growth stagnated overall during her tenure, with manufacturing jobs plunging nearly 25 percent…the former first lady was unable to pass big ticket legislation… many promised jobs never materialized and others migrated to other states as she turned to her first presidential run…data shows that upstate actually lost jobs during clinton's first term."

compare that to my record. in a recent new york post article by steve cuozzo, "how  helped save new york city," the paper writes that i—and this is a direct quote—"waded into a landscape of empty fifth avenue storefronts, the dust-bowl mugging ground that was central park and a wall street area seemingly on its last legs as companies moved out…almost by force of will — [he] rode to the rescue. expressing rare faith in the future, he was instrumental in kick-starting the regeneration of neighborhoods and landmarks almost given up for dead."

this is what i want to do for our country—i want to jumpstart america.

now let's look at what the obama-clinton policies have done nationally.

their policies produced 1.2% growth, the weakest so-called recovery since the great depression, and a doubling of the national debt.

there are now 94.3 million americans outside the labor force. it was 80.5 million when president obama took office, an increase of nearly 14 million people.

the obama-clinton agenda of tax, spend and regulate has created a silent nation of jobless americans.

home ownership is at its lowest rate in 51 years.

nearly 12 million have been added to the food stamp rolls since president obama took office. another nearly 7 million americans were added to the ranks of those in poverty.

we have the lowest labor force participation rates in four decades.

58 percent of african-american youth are either outside the labor force or not employed.

1 in 5 american households do not have a single member in the labor force. these are the real unemployment numbers—the five percent figure is one of the biggest hoaxes in modern politics.

meanwhile, american households are earning more than $4,000 less today than they were sixteen years ago.

the average worker today pays 31.5 percent of their wages to income and payroll taxes. on top of that, state and local taxes consume another 10 percent.

the united states also has the highest business tax rate among the major industrialized nations of the world, at 35 percent. it's almost 40 percent when you add in taxes at the state level.

in other words, we punish companies for making products in america—but let them ship products into the u.s. tax-free if they move overseas.

this is backwards. all of our policies should be geared towards keeping jobs and wealth inside the united states.

under my plan, no american company will pay more than 15% of their business income in taxes. small businesses will benefit the most from this plan. hillary clinton's plan will require small business to pay as much as three times more in taxes than what i am proposing, and her onerous regulations will put them totally out of business. i am going to cut regulations massively.

our lower business tax will also end job-killing corporate inversions, and cause trillions in new dollars and wealth to come pouring into our country—and into cities like detroit. to help unleash this new job creation, we will allow businesses to immediately expense new business investments.

no one will gain more from these proposals than low-and-middle income americans.

my plan will also help reduce the cost of childcare by allowing parents to fully deduct the average cost of childcare spending from their taxes.

we are also going to bring back trillions of dollars from american businesses that is now parked overseas. our plan will bring that cash home, applying a 10 percent tax. this money will be re-invested in states like michigan.

finally, no family will have to pay the death tax. american workers have paid taxes their whole lives, and they should not be taxed again at death—it's just plain wrong. we will repeal it.

next comes regulatory reform

as with taxes, i will have one overriding goal when it comes to regulation: i want to keep jobs and wealth in america.

motor vehicle manufacturing is one of the most heavily regulated industries in the country. the u.s. economy today is twenty-five percent smaller than it would have been without the surge of regulations since 1980.

it is estimated that current overregulation is costing our economy as much as $2 trillion dollars a year—that's money taken straight out of cities like yours.

the federal register is now over 80,000 pages long. as the wall street journal noted, president obama has issued close to four hundred new major regulations since taking office, each with a cost to the american economy of $100 million or more.

in 2015 alone, the obama administration unilaterally issued more than 2,000 new regulations—each a hidden tax on american consumers, and a massive lead weight on the american economy.

it is time to remove the anchor dragging us down.

upon taking office, i will issue a temporary moratorium on new agency regulations. my running mate, mike pence, signed a similar order when he became governor of indiana. this will give our american companies the certainty they need to reinvest in our community, get cash off of the sidelines, start hiring for new jobs, and expanding businesses.

i will also immediately cancel all illegal and overreaching executive orders.

next, i will ask each and every federal agency to prepare a list of all of the regulations they impose on americans which are not necessary, do not improve public safety, and which needlessly kill jobs. those regulations will be eliminated.

we are in a competition with the world, and i want america to win. when i am president, we will.

one of the most important reforms of all is trade reform

as bernie sanders has said, hillary clinton has bad judgment. we've seen this bad judgment overseas, in libya, iraq, and syria. we've seen it in iran. we've seen it from president obama, when he gives $150 billion to iran, the number one terror state, and even gives them $400 million in money-laundered cash as a ransom payment.

but we've also seen the terrible obama-clinton judgment right here in detroit.

hillary clinton has supported the trade deals stripping this city, and this country, of its jobs and wealth.

she supported bill clinton's nafta, she supported china's entrance into the world trade organization, she supported the job-killing trade deal with south korea, and she supports the trans-pacific partnership.

let's talk about south korea for a moment, because it so perfectly illustrates the broken promises that have hurt so many american workers.

president obama, and the usual so-called experts who've been wrong about every trade deal for decades, predicted that the trade deal with south korea would increase our exports to south korea by more than $10 billion—resulting in some 70,000 jobs.

like hillary clinton's broken promises to new york, these pledges all turned out to be false. instead of creating 70,000 jobs, it has killed nearly 100,000, according to the economic policy institute. our exports to south korea haven't increased at all, but their imports to us have surged more than $15 billion—more than doubling our trade deficit with that country.

the next betrayal will be the trans-pacific partnership. hillary clinton's closest friend, terry mcauliffe, confirmed what i have said on this from the beginning: if sent to the oval office, hillary clinton will enact the tpp. guaranteed. her donors will make sure of it.

a vote for hillary clinton is a vote for tpp—and it's also a vote for nafta.

our annual trade deficit in goods with mexico has risen from close to zero in 1993 to almost $60 billion. our total trade deficit in goods hit nearly $800 billion last year.

this is a strike at the heart of michigan, and our nation as a whole.

according to the bureau of labor statistics, before nafta went into effect, there were 285,000 auto workers in michigan. today, that number is only 160,000.

detroit is still waiting for hillary clinton's apology. i expect detroit will get that apology right around the same time hillary clinton turns over the 33,000 emails she deleted.

hillary clinton's trans-pacific partnership (tpp) will be an even bigger disaster for the auto industry. in fact, ford motor company has announced its opposition to the deal.

according to the economic policy institute, the u.s. trade deficit with the proposed tpp member countries cost over 1 million manufacturing jobs in 2015.

by far the biggest losses occurred in motor vehicles and parts, which lost nearly 740,000 manufacturing jobs.

michigan ranks first for jobs lost as a share of state workforce due to the trade deficit with tpp members.

just imagine how many more automobile jobs will be lost if the tpp is actually approved. that is why i have announced we will withdraw from the deal before that can ever happen. hillary clinton will never withdraw from the tpp. she is bought, controlled and paid-for by her donors and special interests.

because my only interest is the american people, i have previously laid out a detailed 7-point plan for trade reform, available on my website. it includes strong protections against currency manipulation, tariffs against any countries that cheat by unfairly subsidizing their goods, and it includes a renegotiation of nafta. if we don't get a better deal, we will walk away.

at the center of my plan is trade enforcement with china. this alone could return millions of jobs into our economy.

china is responsible for nearly half of our entire trade deficit. they break the rules in every way imaginable. china engages in illegal export subsidies, prohibited currency manipulation, and rampant theft of intellectual property. they also have no real environmental or labor protections, further undercutting american workers.

just enforcing intellectual property rules alone could save millions of american jobs. according to the u.s. international trade commission, improved protection of america's intellectual property in china would produce more than 2 million more jobs right here in the united states.

add to that the saved jobs from cracking down on currency cheating and product dumping, and we will bring trillions of dollars in new wealth and wages back to the united states.

trade has big benefits, and i am in favor of trade. but i want great trade deals for our country that create more jobs and higher wages for american workers. isolation is not an option, only great and well-crafted trade deals are.

also critical to our economic renewal will be energy reform

the obama-clinton administration has blocked and destroyed millions of jobs through their anti-energy regulations, while raising the price of electricity for both families and businesses.

as a result of recent obama epa actions coal-fired power plants across michigan have either shut down entirely or undergone expensive conversions. the obama-clinton war on coal has cost michigan over 50,000 jobs. hillary clinton says her plan will "put a lot of coal companies and coal miners out of business."

we will put our coal miners and steel workers back to work.

clinton not only embraces president obama's job-killing energy restrictions but wants to expand them, including going after oil and natural gas production that employs some 10 million americans.

according to the heritage foundation, by 2030, the obama-clinton energy restrictions will eliminate another half a million manufacturing jobs, reduce economic output by $2.5 trillion dollars, and reduce incomes by $7,000 dollars per person.

a trump administration will end this war on the american worker, and unleash an energy revolution that will bring vast new wealth to our country.

according to the institute for energy research, lifting the restrictions on all sources of american energy will:

increase gdp by more than $100 billion dollars annually, add over 500,000 new jobs annually, and increase annual wages by more than $30 billion dollars over the next 7 years;

increase federal, state, and local tax revenues by almost $6 trillion dollars over 4 decades;

increase totaleconomic activity by more than $20 trillion dollars over the next 40 years.

the reforms i have outlined today are only the beginning

when we reform our tax, trade, energy and regulatory policies, we will open a new chapter in american prosperity.

we can use this new wealth to rebuild our military and our infrastructure.

as part of this new future, we will also be rolling out proposals to increase choice and reduce cost in childcare, offering much-needed relief to american families. i will unveil my plan on this in the coming weeks that i have been working on with my daughter ivanka and an incredible team of experts.

likewise, our education reforms will help parents send their kids to a school of their choice.

we will also give our police and law enforcement the funds and support they need to restore law and order to this country. without security, there can be no prosperity. we must have law and order.

in the coming days, we will be rolling out plans on all of these items. one of my first acts as president will be to repeal and replace disastrous obamacare, saving another 2 million american jobs.

we will also rebuild our military, and get our allies to pay their fair share for the protection we provide—saving us countless more billions to invest in our own country.

we also have a plan, on our website, for a complete reform of the veterans health administration. this is something so desperately needed to make sure our vets are fully supported and get the care they deserve.

detroit—the motor city—will come roaring back. we will offer a new future, not the same old failed policies of the past.

our party has chosen to make new history by selecting a nominee from outside the rigged and corrupt system.

the other party has reached backwards into the past to choose a nominee from yesterday—who offers only the rhetoric of yesterday, and the policies of yesterday.

there will be no change under hillary clinton—only four more years of obama.

but we are going to look boldly into the future.

we will build the next generation of roads, bridges, railways, tunnels, sea ports and airports that our country deserves.

american cars will travel the roads, american planes will connect our cities, and american ships will patrol the seas.

american steel will send new skyscrapers soaring.

we will put new american metal into the spine of this nation.

it will be american hands that rebuild this country, and it will be american energy—mined from american sources—that powers this country.

it will be american workers who are hired to do the job.

americanism, not globalism, will be our new credo.

our country will reach amazing new heights.

all we have to do is stop relying on the tired voices of the past.

we can't fix a rigged system by relying on the people who rigged it in the first place.

we can't solve our problems by relying on the politicians who created them.

only by changing to new leadership, and new solutions, will we get new results.

we need to stop believing in politicians, and start believing in america.

before everything great that has ever happened, the doubters have always said it couldn't be done.

america is ready to prove the doubters wrong.

they want you to think small. i am asking you to think big.

we are ready to dream great things for our country once again.

we are ready to show the world that america is back—bigger, and better and stronger than ever before.

thank you, and god bless you. thank you. thank you very much.  thank you very much. so amazing. rudy just left. he just said, "i don't believe this. this is unbelievable." nobody believes it.

the crowds we're getting -- i'm the messenger, but i'll tell you what, the message is the right message. we're tired of incompetence. we're tired of not taking care of our military. we're tired of not taking care of our vets, who are being taken care of very poorly.

we're tired of so many different things. and this is what happens. so, our mayor, my friend, rudy giuliani just walks, i'm telling you, he said, "i don't believe this. this is incredible."

and what he hasn't seen, and your governor, by the way, who's a great guy.

and he's now seeing it, they're walking outside because there are thousands of people outside that can't get in. i said, "rudy, you think this is bad, go take a look outside."

so i just want to thank pat and rudy and i want to thank everybody for being here. and we are going to have a good time. we love north carolina. we love north carolina

we did really well in the primaries if you remember, and i hear we are doing really well now. we have to win. that november 8 day is so important.

you know, i bring things up like the judges right? supreme court justices, we have to get - you know, you could have as many as four? i guess it's a scenario where this president could pick five supreme court justices.

and if you pick two that are left, left, left, it's going to be a disaster for our country. your second amendment, the national rifle association endorsed and they endorsed me early, a long time ago. and they're great people, wayne and chris, they are great people.

but if you - if you do something with these - i'll tell you what, justices right now, you lost a great one with scalia. we want to replace with justices very much like justice scalia and that's going to happen. it is so important.

so if for no other reason, i mean it's such an important - it's one of the most important elections for a lot of reasons, not just that but for a lot of reasons. but that's so obviously, because for whatever reason, they say this could be the presidency. this next four years is where you will pick more supreme court justices than anybody has every had the opportunity to do. believe me, i'll make you very proud of those justices everyday.

so we had an incident a few days ago with the $400 million - all cash, right -- $400 million in all cash, anybody know what that looks like? that's a lot of cash. that's a lot of case.

and honestly, it's so sad. think of it, going to iran, a terrorist state. now i happen to think they have plenty of money, we've given then $150 billion, so the $400 million is just, you know - i happen to think it goes into their accounts in switzerland personally.

now, a lot of people say, "no, no, it's used for terror," and they use it for terror because it's the number one terror funder - not even close. but i also think that when you have $400 million in cash, different denominations, do you see the size of this? i guess they did release the pictures after all. they released pictures.

and interesting i'll tell you, i sort of think it goes into bank accounts, right? you know, i sort of think they take it, they probably use some for this, some for that. you can do a lot of things.

and obama said that he did it because we don't have a working account with iran. do you believe that? how long does it take to set up an account? right? you don't have a working account, you set up an account, right?

you set up an account and it takes about - look, what's going on in this country - folks, folks, what's going on in this country is insane. and we have people running our country that don't know what they're doing, they're grossly incompetent, and it's time. we have to make change, real change. not obama change, we have to make change.

whether it's bergdahl, we get bergdahl who was a traitor, and they get five of the greatest killers that they've wanted for eight years. we get bergdahl -- i call it the five for one trade. for the iran deal, where we get nothing, we get nothing.

they get ultimately, they have the path, beautiful path, they'll get way, way earlier than that. they'll get nuclear weapons, so if you get trump you're going to see a lot of changes to that deal. that'll happen fast.

you're going to see some big changes and what i really -- i mean, i saw where president obama said that the $400 million in cash was not, had nothing to do with the release of the hostages, right? it really doesn't work, does it? does it? i mean, remember obamacare, "you're going to keep your doctor, you're going to keep your plan, over and over again, you're going to keep your doctor." it was a lie.

and in fact, if he didn't make the lie, he would have never gotten it approved because most democrats, many of the democrats didn't want to do it. it was only that, that got them to sign it and to approve it. and it was a lie.

and the $400 million, and from what the rumor is and from what the reports are, the hostages couldn't leave the airport until this other plane arrived. they don't know why, but i think we all have a pretty good reason why. it was all a big lie, it was all a big lie.

and it's so sad to see, and let me tell you, hillary clinton is going to be four more years of obama, but maybe worse. maybe worse. there'll be four more years. four more years of isis, four more years of high taxes. you know yesterday i had a -- at a big event, really. it turned out to be a very big event in detroit

good event, very good. and we got wonderful reviews and a lot of good comments. but the thing i'm doing, i'm cutting taxes big league. especially for the middle class and especially for businesses. because businesses are dying and that means small businesses, businesses period.

businesses are leaving our country like they've never left before. they're going all over. they're going to mexico, that i can tell you. mexico is like the eighth wonder of the world. you know i've been telling a story, a friend of mine, good friend of mine, good guy. he builds plants, he builds plants for cars, for computers, you know where they make them. massive plants. and i said to him, how are you doing?

and he's worked in north carolina, by the way. i said to him, how are you doing? he said phenomenal. he's like, "i think the biggest in the world at this -" that's what he does. great guy. i said how's it all going? he said, 'you've got to see mexico, donald. it's the eighth wonder of the world. what we're building there is like, never has been built. we've never seen anything like it".

and i said, how are we doing in the united states? i'm more interested in that, ok? it's ok i guess. right? you know, america first, folks. america first. america.

right, america first.

america first. we get a little tired of these deals where they actually put, and you know why, because of lobbyists and special interests and people representing and people wanting it to happen. it's just not that they want other countries to benefit over us. there are reasons for it and you know, when i raise money, and i'm putting up a lot of money for my own campaign, i'm funding me.

and i'm raising for the republican party. and we're getting a lot of money from the small donors.

remember two months ago? well, i hadn't started; i wanted to make sure i get the nomination before i start, right?

let me get the nomination, please. and then i took a lot of heat from the press, the world's most dishonest people, by the way.  terrible.  terrible.

those cameras will not move and show how many people are in this auditorium. those cameras -- those cameras are not going on the move unless we have a protester, is there a protester up there in the quota? any protesters?

if we had a protester that's the only time they move because they're showing something that in their mind is a bad thing, so then they move. but i like that, i've always liked my protesters because the cameras show these massive crowds and people say wow, was that a big crowd.

you know, i go home to my wife, i say how's it going? she says darling, your speech was very good, were there many people there? i say yeah, about 7,000. that's a small group.

its only confined -- i mean you had to see outside. i felt so badly -- i came up -- i came up -- thank you and i love you too. who said that? who said that, huh?

thank you, thank you. but i came up with rudy from new york and we're driving up and we're going block after block after block the line. and i said are those people going to be able to get in?

they said the place is already full. and rudy just said man; i've never seen anything like that. maybe a couple of days before an election, but this is what's happening. because of the fact we have a movement going, folks.

because people are so tired of them.

they're so tired of them.

so -- and by the way -- and by the way, voter id, watch with that. watch with voter id, why aren't we having voter id? in other words, i wanna vote, here's my identification, i wanna vote, as opposed to somebody coming up and voting 15 times for hillary.

well -- and i will not tell you to vote 15 times. i will not tell you to do that, ok?

you won't vote 15 times. but people will, they'll vote many times and how that could've happened , it's unbelievable. and the governor just told me that they're going before the united states supreme court justice roberts and maybe they can get a stay. let's see what happens, ok?

let's see what happens. that's a very important thing. but i wrote a few things down and to me, so important -- yes, darling thank you.

unstable hillary lacks the judgment, now; bernie sanders said she lacks judgment, right? and nobody said anything about it, no problem. he said you lack judgment. and -- during one of the debates, nobody said, it was fine.

when i say it they say that's terrible the way you talk.

she does, she lacks judgment, she lacks temperament and i'm the one that used unfit many, many months ago. and now they've turned it around, use it on me, unfit? i'm unfit? that's -- that's a first. but she lacks the temperament and the moral character to lead this country, its very simple.

she really does. she's a dangerous person who doesn't tell the truth which has been proven very loudly.

i've never seen a -- i don't think we've ever had greater proof of that, of anybody.

and she has disregarded the lives of americans -- you see what's happening -- with what she has done with her server? and you know why she did that.

so, i just look at this, and i said that if she gets elected, she will cause the destruction of this country from within. remember that. remember that.

she will -- she will allow people into our country that will do damage, they will do damage, folks. you look at what's going on in the world -- look at france; take a good look at france. i have friends that go to france. they used to love france.

they say, no thank you. they don't expect to be going back anytime for a long time.

i have one friend, i said, how was your trip this year to france? he said, france isn't france anymore. we're not going. and so many people are saying that.

look at what's going on with germany. look at what's happening with germany. look at the crime; look at the problems. we have enough problems in our country right now. we don't need additional problems, folks. we don't need additional problems.

and for all we know, this could be the great trojan horse. this could be. we don't know who these people are.

now, they're coming in through obama. and i looked at a chart yesterday, and it's like for years, it's sort of like this, a little uptick. and the last number or period of time, it's like, "wah, wah, wah, wah." there -- i have never seen anything like it.

they're letting them in, and again, you can't vet them. you don't know where they come from. we don't know -- look at the damage that two people in san bernardino, probably radicalized the guy -- the woman coming in. look at the damage in orlando. look at the damage that was done in orlando by one wack job, one sick wack job. and you know what he was screaming? he's screaming what they all scream.

and we have to get smart, folks. we don't need the problems -- and we've already got those problems, just so you understand. because they're coming into the country, they're being put where nobody even knows where they are.

it's like, if i were the enemy, i would say, i can't believe they're that stupid. they're taking my people and they're putting them all over the place, because you have great military right here.

and our military...

our military cannot be beaten. but you know what could happen? when we don't know where they are, where they're coming, you've them all over the place.

and folks, it's some. you don't need many; you don't need many. one person in orlando. two people -- look at in france, 130. now, they have the strictest gun laws anywhere in the world, france, paris. one hundred and thirty people killed, 130.

and i've said 100 times, if this man or if this woman, or if that woman or man had a gun in paris or in san bernardino and the bullets were flying in the other direction, would have been a whole different story, folks.

would have been a whole different.

for those -- for those foolish people that say second amendment, would have been a whole different -- and i'd go a step further. if these people, bad people, bad, sick, sick, sick people.

if these people knew there were guns in the good guys hands, right, they probably wouldn't have gone in in the first place, all right? all right? gun free -- what do you think of these gun- free zones?

do you know what a gun-free zone is? that's like -- they study where the gun-free zones -- if they would have known you had guns, if they would have known that they were going to be shot at from the other side, it would have been a whole different story. maybe it wouldn't have even happened in the first place.

so they better not come here. they better not. they better not.

so recently a book came out a couple of weeks ago. a secret service agent made a statement because she said the other day she short-circuited. hey, could you imagine if i said that "i short circuited"?

they would be calling for my execution, -- electric chair. they'd bring back the electric chair. it would be a whole different ball game if i said it, believe me. but the secret service agent said, "she simply lacks the integrity and temperament to serve in the office," right?

"from the bottom of my soul," he said, "i know this to be true. her leadership style, which is volcanic and impulsive, and she makes bad decisions. ok? hey, you know, it's one thing to make bad decisions. it's another thing to be wacky and make bad decisions.

she is disdainful of the rules set for everyone else and she hasn't changed a bit. this is -- that was the good thing. i couldn't say the bad things. it was too much. nobody would even -- nobody would even believe it. you've got to see this book. nobody would believe because it's so terrible, so terrible.

and she comes across like this woman -- nice, easy -- but she's not. and -- and she's -- listen -- she's not a leader, not a leader. and she is a liar.

hey, hey -- 33,000 e-mails are gone. ok? 33,000 e-mails are gone. they're gone. how do you get rid of 33,000 e-mails? who sends 33,000 e-mails? i mean, 33 -- do you know how many that is? i think that's like 24 hours a day reading them or sending them, but it wouldn't matter. for years, 33,000 e-mails are missing.

and she's so guilty. she's so guilty.

i think it's a tremendous blot in our country. i really mean that. i think what happened over the last two weeks with respect to her, especially in light of the fact that general petraeus and many others have suffered unbelievable consequences. i think it's a tremendous blot on our country, a tremendous blot. just remember that.

but i just looked at this -- the economic failures of obama and clinton, et cetera. obama-clinton economic policies have produced 1.2 percent economic growth, the weakest so-called recovery since the great depression. now, this is, like, unbelievable -- 1.2.

do you know china goes to 7 percent or 8 percent, it's like a national catastrophe. now, what they do is they cut their currency.

they devalue their currency, and big league, and then all of our businesses continue to be drained out of the united states. our money, our jobs. they make our product, they sell our product to us. no tax, no nothing, you devalue -- see devaluing is sort of cheating.

you know, it's sort of like cheating. now i have great relationships with china. i've done great business with china, i've done really well with china. i have these tenants, i sell condos, i own the bank of america building in san francisco with a group, a great group, thank you ma'am.

got to win -- got to win north carolina. thank you.

thank you. but they -- it's cheating, it's really cheating. and when i look at these trade deals -- it's so sad -- where we lose $800 billion -- billion with b -- dollars a year on trade with china alone, it's $400 billion and $500 billion and $505 billion. this is year in and year out, it's actually amazing that our country keeps going. but what has happened is, we have people in the audience, in 18 years, they're making less money now than they made 18 years ago, in real wages, 18.

and in many cases, they're working two and three jobs, ok? but they're making less money now than they made 18 years ago. and those stats come right out, real wages. they're working harder, they're getting older.

so in theory it's supposed to be the other way, you know you work and you're young, you don't care. get a little older, it's like, oh by the way, how about me? i think i'm working harder too, if you want to know.

i never worked this hard in my life. but i like it, i like it, i love it actually because i've met so many incredible people. you know i really got -- thank you -- i really got a tremendous understanding of this country. because i'm going to places that i've heard about, i've known about, i'm stopping everywhere. and i see the carnage that nafta has caused, i see the carnage. it's been horrible. i see upstate new york, i see north carolina, but i see every state. you look at new england. new england got really whacked. new england got hit.

you look at ohio, what happened there, and still happening. by the way, this isn't like it's going to happen or it's all over, it's getting worse. you look at ohio, you look at michigan, what's going on with the car plants being built in mexico, is unbelievable.

and more and more, you know they're moving. we were just talking about the autoworkers yesterday. where they've lost over 100,000 autoworkers in michigan, the state of michigan, which is our car capital and it's really not the car capital anymore. mexico will become the new car capital of the world in a very short period of time. no, think of it.

and that's only because we allow it to happen. and i like mexico. and i respect the leaders of mexico because they're much smarter, they're much street smarter, but they're much smarter and more cunning than our leaders. but you have to see what's going on. and one of the reasons i won indiana was bobby knight, because he's the best, he's the greatest.

but one of the reasons is that carrier air conditioning let 1,400 people go and they're building a plant in mexico. and we're not going to let it happen . . .

it's a suicidal pact for our country. and you know i've watched for years.

i was never a politician until 14 months ago. so i can't believe i'm saying i'm a politician.

can't believe it.

but -- but i've been watching for years and i've watched as -- as the government tries to keep businesses from leaving our country and going to other countries. and i've seen low interest loans, i've seen zero interest loans, i've seen all sorts of subsidies.

i get it. that stuff's not gonna work, that's not gonna work. what's gonna work is -- as an example, carrier moves to mexico and you wish him a lot of luck, good luck, have a nice plant. i hope my friend bills it, right?

and then you know what happens? when they make their air conditioners -- and then think they're gonna sell that air conditioner, people living in indianapolis -- where they come from -- for a similar price.

and they think they're gonna sell it there and have no repercussions? with me, they have repercussions, ok?

with me, they have repercussions.

with me, we inform them that if you move, you're gonna pay a 35 percent tax on every single air conditioner that pour across our now very secure borders.

and two things are gonna happen, one of two things -- one of two things are gonna happen. number one, if you get them in time, they're not moving. throws it all off-balance, since they're all off-kilter. number one they're not -- now, nobody -- people would say well, why doesn't anybody use this? why doesn't anybody mention it?

i'll tell you why. because they're controlled by their lobbyists, they're politicians. and carrier goes out or whoever it might be this -- i'm just using carrier as an example. its hundreds and thousands. its thousands of company.

and millions of jobs we're talking about. i was looking at numbers -- i'm not gonna repeat the numbers because they'll say i was wrong, it can't be that high, i couldn't believe it was that high. but it's thousands of companies and millions and millions of jobs.

and you'd say why aren't -- like, why doesn't somebody else say what trump is saying? so i'm controlled by myself because i'm putting up my money, ok? i'm putting up my money.

but...

although we raised, did you see $82 million last month, $82 million last month?

and a lot of it -- a lot of the money was the small donations which republicans never get. a lot of them -- i think it averaged $61 a hit, $61 can you imagine that? the total that we raised and in fact, in may i told you i was taking heat because they said  didn't raise any money.

and they told you why, right? i didn't raise it because i didn't know -- i gotta make sure i got the nomination. if i didn't get the nomination, i would've gone to turnberry and played golf, ok?

in scotland. but you know what? i got the nomination so now i had a start. and we raised $51 million in june, right? a lot of it in small donations and we raised $82 million in july.

people are going, even the haters back there, the people that truly hate trump -- they said, that's amazing. so we're doing all right. and people look, they want -- they wanna hear this message. because this is a message this is an important message.

but when you say -- and when you hear what i just said -- you charge a tariff or a tax. and guess what? and people said why hasn't the -- why haven't the politicians, they're smart, why haven't they done it?

because they're controlled by people that work for many of these companies and they're not gonna do it. whether it's donors or whether its special interests or lobbyists they control because they want it to happen.

and honestly, i think it's a total disgrace.

i think it's a total disgrace for the millions of jobs, and for the thousands and thousands of companies that have left our country. if i were here to speak to every one of those companies for five minutes -- bye, bye.

they were so quiet. you know, i like the hillary protesters. you know why? they're so nice and quiet. the bernie protesters were brutal; they were tough. right? the hillary protesters had no spirit. did you see that?

she starts screaming and the guy walks up, "i'll go."

the bernie ones were -- they had a lot more spirit. i think we're going to get a lot of bernie voters, if you want to know the truth. because they do understand that trade is killing us. trade.

so, a few things, a few other facts i wrote, which i think are amazing. one is the 1.2 percent lowest in, you know, forget it. that's not a recovery. it's probably much -- don't forget, when they announced 1.2 percent, that means it's lower. and 1.2 is starting to set records.

the national debt -- so, we're up to almost $20 trillion -- $20 trillion! the national debt under obama has doubled. think of it, doubled. might be, i think by the time he gets out, it's going to more than double, but again, we have to very accurate

because i'll say -- they'll say, well, it hasn't quite doubled. believe me, by the time he gets out it will have more than doubled.

the national debt has doubled. and you know the bad part about that? you think if the national debt has doubled, our infrastructure would be great, our country would be in great shape

we'd have beautiful roads, beautiful highways. you see where like 50 percent of the bridges are in danger in this country. and the roadways are a mess.

i have a friend, he's in the trucking business. he said, you know, for years, he had no problem. now he buys these big, beautiful trucks, and the wheels get wiped out because of the potholes on the highways and things that he never had. so, you think with all of that doubling of the national debt, you'd really think that we'd be in good shape from the infrastructure standpoint, right? we're not. we're in very bad shape.

u.s. trade deficit, $800 -- almost $800 billion. nearly 24 million americans in their prime earning years are out of the labor force, right?

in the last seven years, another 14 million people have left the work force. think of it. these are the real numbers, not the 5 percent nonsense.

you know, you look for a job, you can't find your job, you go home, you share, you go to your parents, you go to your friends, you do whatever. you gave up, and now you're considered -- statistically, you're considered employed.

those people are not employed; these are great people. and there are plenty of them in here.

i mean, we have great people. we have the most loyal people. we have the smartest people. you know, so many of my people, they're so smart.

they like to say, well, trump, i don't know if he's got this right -- let me tell you, we have the smartest people. we have the people that are the smartest, and the strongest, and the best and the hardest working.

we have the smartest people. we'll put i.q.s among -- some of us, we couldn't say all of us, right -- against any i.q.s that we -- we have to deal with, . . .

in the last seven years, 14 million. one in five american households do not have a single member in the workforce. pretty bad.

homeownership -- this is one that is amazing to me -- today, homeownership is at its lowest rate in 51 years.

so you own homes, i mean it always used to be the dream to own a home, right? the american home.

lowest that its been in so many years, 51 years. nearly 12 million people and more americans are dependent on food stamps and 2 million more latino americans live in poverty under obama and clinton -- under obama; because clinton's just gonna carry on.

you know, i don't know if you saw. i gave a massive tax decrease yesterday at regulations, we're gonna get rid of so many of them. but clinton is gonna double your taxes; she's gonna double up your taxes.

and she's trying to say well, i don't know like trump's way -- she's gonna double up your taxes. you're gonna have massive tax increases is clinton gets in. enjoy -- enjoy it folks, if that happens.

fifty eight percent of african american youth are not employed. how sad is that? american households are earning $4,000 less -- listen to this one, today -- than they were 16 years ago. many workers are earning less than 1970 in real dollars.

so 1970 -- that's a long time ago, right? they're earning in real dollars less money. so under my plan, we're gonna create millions of new and really good paying jobs. you know, it's interesting because even the pro-obama people say about the jobs that they're bad jobs.

i've heard it from many of the people. they're trying to defend him. but they say they're bad jobs, they're not good jobs. the good jobs -- the good jobs have left. but we'll create millions of new good paying jobs but good jobs.

that's so important, that's so important.

everyone's taxes will go down. hillary clinton has supported tax increases on the middle class for her entire career. she's voted for higher taxes, 235 times in the senate. that's all? i thought it was more than that, 235 times. i hope there's not a decimal point in there or so, 23.5 times.

but i don't think there is -- voted for higher taxes, 235 times in the senate. now, she's planning another job killing -- $1.3 trillion tax increase, that's what her tax increase is gonna be, folks. like you're not paying enough, right?

her plan will tax many small business -- businesses who are already in deep trouble out of business. then we have -- we will make -- and this is so important, this was an ivanka trump, ok? my daughter, so great.

so great.

we're gonna make childcare expenses tax deductible for working families.

and just many, many other things. i mean, we're gonna make some unbelievable changes and it's -- it's so easy. again, you know regulations -- i'm traveling all over and i'm meeting with business owners -- and beyond business owners, even people that work at the businesses, they're being laid off because of it.

regulations; if i told you -- and i'm so surprised, this is probably the biggest surprise -- if you have a small business and i said, you can have one or the other, a major tax cut like we're gonna -- you know, we're bringing it down to 15 percent from more than -- much more than double that.

but if i told you that you could have a massive tax decrease or really substantially -- but in a real way -- cut regulations -- a hundred percent of the people i talk to would take the regulation, if you could only have one or the other. it's amazing, its amazing

and that surprised me. surprised you too?

surprised him, too.

a hundred percent. i mean, everybody -- businesses can't form anymore, the tax -- the regulatory burden is so incredible that you can't form businesses -- very hard -- and businesses that are in existence are being put out of existence for regulations that don't do anything. we want safety regulations, we want environmental regulations. we're not, you know, people that don't want these things. we have to have that.

we want clear air, we want clean water. we want clear water. but -- but...

to do that -- and there are certain things that you want to do, but to do that, you don't have to destroy our country and destroy our businesses.

so you know, i just wrote this down today. hillary wants to raise taxes. it's a comparison. i want to lower them. hillary wants to expand regulations, which she does big league. can you believe that? i will reduce them very, very substantially. could be as much as 70, 75 percent.

hillary wants to shut down energy production. i want to expand it.

lower electric -- lower electric bills, folks. hillary wants to abolish -- essentially abolish the second amendment. by the way, and if she gets to pick...

if she gets to pick her judges, nothing you can do, folks. although the second amendment people, maybe there is. i don't know. but -- but i'll tell you what. that will be a horrible day. if -- if hillary gets to put her judges -- right now, we're tied. you see what's going on.

you see what's going on? we tied because scalia - this was not suppose to happen. justice scalia was going to be around for ten more years at least and this is what happens. that was a horrible thing.

so now look at it. so hillary essentially wants to abolish the second amendment. now, speaking to the nra folks - who are great - when you - when you -- and i'll tell you, they endorsed me.

they endorsed me very early. my son's a member. i'm a member.

if you - we can add i think the national rifle association, we can add the second amendment to the justices - they almost go - in a certain way, hand in hand. now the justices are going to do things that are so important and we have such great justices, you saw my list of 11 that have been vetted and respected.

and have gotten great. and they to a little equate - but if you don't do the right thing, either you're not going to have a second amendment or you're not going to have much of it left. and you're not going to be able to protect yourself, which you need

you know, when the bad guys burst into your house, they're not looking about into second amendments, and, do i have the right to do this? ok, the bad guys aren't going to be giving up their weapons

but the good people will say, "oh, well, that's the law." no, no, not going to happen, we can't let it happen. we can't let it happen.

hillary clinton wants to have totally open borders where people flow into our country.

where they flow into our country, and they take your jobs, and they do lots of things. and i want people to come into our country but they have to do it through a process, they have to do it legally, right?

so you have drugs pouring in. you have everything coming in.

you know, in new hampshire, a great state, they have a tremendous heroin problem. i said to them, we will stop the drugs from pouring in to our country from the southern border. they're going to stop.

and by the way, we will build a wall. that's legal.

walls do work. walls do work.

now here's one and you know -- i mean she doesn't look that way, but she is -- hillary wants to invade foreign countries. that's what she does and look at the mess. so we've spent -- you know for two years, for three years, i've been saying we spent $2 trillion, right, in iraq, more now, i guess. somebody actually said to me the other day that they were talking about four or five trillion in the middle east.

and i'm going to get the accurate number. they don't know the accurate number, the truth is they have no idea. they have no idea what we're doing. we're sending equipment over, the enemies take it in. we sent over 2,300 humvees that are totally armor plated. they got stolen by the enemy, 2,300. i thought they meant like two or 23.

or 230 was too much, 2,300 humvees and they got stolen. they got taken by the enemy. you know, shot guns fired in the air, the ones we gave to the so-called allies, these great allies that we always pick, who end up being worse than the guys who we're trying to get out.

so, terrible. hillary and president obama refused to use the term radical islamic terrorism. big problem. big problem. hillary wants to release violent criminals and criminal offenders from prison, that's wonderful, enjoy yourselves. i want to work with our police. our police are so incredible, they're not getting the respect they deserve.

not getting the respect they deserve.

and we're going to, in our country, restore law and order. we have to, we have to restore law and order.

and the police are going to be careful and they're going to be studied and they're going to be -- but we have to restore law and order. what happened in dallas, where all of those people were shot down. absolutely, absolutely for no reason. viciously shot down, and so many others. i was with one of the police groups the other day. they're endorsing me.

of like, eight other states in the last short while where the same, smaller number, but the same thing was happening where police are being killed. we have to respect and cherish our police.

school choice we want, common core we don't want. we've got to get rid of common core, bring educational...

and folks, and we have to re-negotiate with nafta. and by the way, going back to the wall, mexico is going to pay for the wall. that i can tell you.

listen, you know these politicians, they don't know me. they don't understand me. and i am, i'm in a group of 50 people, these are real geniuses. these are 50 people that have been running our country forever and they said we can't support . the reason they can't, you know why, because i'm not going to hire these people, i don't want these people.

take a look. take a look at what these people -- these are sort of like the people that have been involved with washington, making decisions militarily on defense, on other things -- take a look what has happened in our country. our military is depleted, our vets aren't taken care of.

we can't beat isis. can you imagine general george patton, who is right now spinning in his grave, the great general douglas macarthur -- can you imagine -- and i say, because we have so many military people, and this is such a military state and i love it.

i love. but can you imagine them seeing that we can't beat these 25 or 30,000 people, we can't beat them? we're fighting a political correct war.

it's a political correct war. i mean, you know what's going on. you know what's going on. these are people that chop off heads. these are people that, in steel cages, drop steel cages into the waters and drowned large numbers of people.

these are people that buried people in the sand. we've got to knock them out.

i was against the war in iraq. we shouldn't have been to the war in iraq. it destabilized the middle east and i said that was going to happen. but we shouldn't have gotten out the way we got out.

the way we got out was insane. and obama gave a date, and he -- and that's how isis happened, folks. hence, the birth of isis.

congratulations, hillary clinton. congratulate -- i mean, she -- she should get -- if i'm isis, i call her up and i give her the most valuable player award. ok?

and i guarantee you with libya, which was her baby, and all of the other mistakes she has made. obama takes now, because obviously, for him, that's the better alternative, all right? but he has been an incompetent president. he has done a horrible job.  and i guarantee you that if he had it to it again -- and he would only say this to his wife -- but if he had it to do again, he would not have chosen hillary clinton to be his secretary of state, because she made so many horrible mistakes and cost so many lives.

and i mean lives on both sides. i'm not just saying -- i mean lives on both sides. she's inept; she's inept.

and to think that she is even allowed to run for the presidency of the united states, when she deleted and got rid of 33,000 e-mails is an embarrassment to our country, and it always will be, ok? it always will be.

so -- so, i want to thank all of you for being here. look, i'm going to be around, and we're going to be coming to north carolina a lot. got to win it, very important

but -- the people are great. my daughter-in-law comes from north carolina. i'm here all the time.

but -- but people -- the people are great. the military is great. we are going to make america great again.

we're going to start winning. we're going to put america first. we're going to make america safe again.

but never, ever forget, we are going to make america great again.

thank you. thank you, everybody. i'll be back soon. thank you. god bless you.
thank you. thank you, everybody. thank you. unbelievable. thank you very much. thank you very much. it's a great honor. thank you.

amazing. amazing. what great people.

we're going to bring back our jobs to pennsylvania. we're going to bring back our jobs to the united states.

going to bring back our jobs, folks. i've looked at the numbers and i see what's happening in pennsylvania. i see what's happening all over our country.

you look at new york state, you look at new england, you look anywhere in the country where you want to go to, all over it's the same. manufacturing way down, jobs way down. you go to other countries, they're taking our companies, they're taking our jobs.

people are right now working harder than they've ever worked. eighteen years ago they made more money in real wages, 18 years, think of it. eighteen years ago many of the people in this incredibly big room, and thank you for being here, you know it's 93 degrees out.

and they still have a lot of people trying to get in, i don't know if they can get them in. should we let them in? just let them in.

but 18 years ago, people were making more money in real wages than they make today. and today they're working two jobs, some people are working three jobs. so they're older, and they're working harder, and they're making less money, all right? a friend of mine, i've been telling this story over the last month because it's better than going to wharton or better than going to harvard and asking them to do a study, because you learn it in three minutes.

but let me just tell you. right now, mexico and other countries are building facilities, plants, the likes of which you've never seen. we're going to build the wall, don't worry, we're going to build the wall, we're going to build it, we're going to build it.

but a friend of mine, and actually a supporter, big supporter, great guy. he builds plants, that's what he does, he builds plants. he doesn't want to build apartments, he doesn't want to build office buildings, he wants to build plants. and he's just about the biggest there is. and i said how are things going? he said very well, how are you doing in the u.s.? not good. how are you doing in mexico?

he said donald do you want to see, it's the eighth wonder of the world. they are building plants, the likes of which i've never seen. he's building some of the greatest plants, big—you look at ford moving vast operations to mexico. the plants. you look at—look at, take a look. by the way, millions of jobs, thousands of companies over the years, they've left us. and we have a few things. we have unemployment, we have empty plants, i saw up in new york state, i saw it in pennsylvania, you were great to meet, you voted a big victory for , thank you.

that was a big victory. i mean i assumed i was going—if i don't win pennsylvania—and by the way, i was talking to our great congressman, and where is he? he's here some place, where is he?

he loves the people, and i have to say, of all of pennsylvania he wants to see this state do well. thank you. but just talking back to a few of my friends that live here, we have a few of the friends and we see what's happened with general electric where they're cutting way back. not going to happen. and you know why they're cutting back, it's one reason. because we don't take care of our miners and we're not producing coal.

and they don't need to make those big, big beautiful, you could call them locomotives i guess, right? whatever the hell they are, they're big and they're powerful and they don't need them like they used to because we don't make our government work for us. they're not working for us. they're working for others, they're not working for us. so when general electric goes out and you see the numbers, i see the numbers, and it's about coal, so i just left parts of virginia and west virginia, and the coal industry's decimated.

the miners are out of work, they're totally out of work. i mean there will be no such thing as coal in this country pretty soon. and we're talking clean coal, we're talking clean coal.

so i was with the miners, we have such tremendous support, west virginia, the mining parts of virginia. all over, ohio, because hillary clinton made the statement not so long ago. a number of months she said, we're going to put the mines and miners out of business. all right? going to put the mines and the miners – so

so, we're not going to let that happen. we're not going to let that happen and we're not going to let it happen in pennsylvania because you know what? a lot of your miners have already lost their jobs, but you have a lot of other jobs that are very reliant on the mines. like, as an example, general electric. and what we're going to do, folks, is going to be so special. we're going to bring it back. we're going to bring back our jobs, we're going to bring back our companies.

when a company wants to leave our country to go to another country and think they're going to make their product, and because our politicians are weak, stupid, taken care of by lobbyists, special interests—they're taken care of by lobbyists, they're taken care of by donors and special interests. that's what—you know, a friend of mine—very smart guy—said—i can't believe it. we're talking about a deal that took place about a month ago.

he said, i can't believe they could have gotten that through. i said, why can't you believe it? well, it's so bad for the country. i said, yeah, but it's good for the politician because they're taken care of by their lobbyists and their donors and the special interests.

so even though you say we want, as an example, general electric to produce more, if they don't want to or if for some reason one of the donors of crooked hillary clinton doesn't want that to happen, even though it's great for erie, even though it's great you, even though it's great for the state of pennsylvania, then it's not going to happen, folks. it's not going to happen.

and by the way—and i have to tell you this. so when they think they're going to take our companies are rip them out of—as an example—this area or this state or any other state and go to mexico and build massive new plants and employ people other than you, and you're going to lose your jobs or you're going to now get two part- time jobs that don't add up to half of what you used to make. that stuff isn't happening anymore. so here's what happens. they're going to build that plant. now, if i were here five years ago and if president obama put me and maybe secretary of keeping business in the united states—that's my title, secretary of keeping business in the united states.

i mean, i like the sound of secretary of defense better. oh, and by the way, we're going to build our military. we're going to be very strong.

really. and we're going to take care of our vets. we're going to take care of our vets, believe me.

but i like the sound—i like the sound of secretary of defense. i like the sound of secretary of the treasury. i like the sound of secretary of state. but i'll tell you, would i be good at keeping jobs over here. would i be...

i'll tell you this. i just have to say the bernie sanders protesters were much, much stronger. they had much more passion, i have to say.

all right. you know what's interesting? if i could speak to them for like five minutes—we want a strong military, we want to take care of our people, we want good education, we want good housing, we want good healthcare. what do we want? we're all in for the same thing.

really amazing. really amazing. so i'll be your secretary of keeping companies in the united states, right? so, i would go to a company like carrier air conditioner, which decided to leave indianapolis, indiana, and i would say here's the story.

we think it's wonderful that you're negotiating with mexico. i'm sure you're going to have a wonderful plant, but here's what's going to happen. if you build that plant and you fire all of these people, 1400 people who were so great to me.

indiana, i won that in a landslide. actually, the timing was good. i won it in a landslide because i know what to do. hillary doesn't know what to do. did you see her yesterday? she has no clue about what we're talking about. folks, she has no clue. she has no clue. crooked hillary. she doesn't know anything about it and, by the way, if she did, she couldn't do it anyway because her donors don't want to do it. there's reasons.

but look, look. i would go to them and say just to keep them. just to keep them. and i wouldn't even care that much. i'll tell you why. ready? i'd say here's the story.

if you leave, in this case, indianapolis, you're going to go to mexico, you're going to make your air conditioning units. every single unit that you make that crosses our now very, very strong border we're going to charge you 35 percent of the cost of that unit. ok? thirty five percent. right?

so simple. thirty five percent the cost of that unit. we hope you enjoy your new plant. very hot weather out there, very hot. we hope you enjoy your new plant, but 35 percent is coming to us. now, here's what's going to happen if they haven't moved yet. a lot of them have moved.

we've lost thousands and thousands of companies, we've lost millions of jobs - too late. i should have been there 10 years ago. nobody would have left. nobody would have left because you need the right messenger, you know, i'm your messenger in terms of this movement.

but you need the right person saying it. so, here's what's going to happen. normally they'd call up whoever it is that was putting the little order down like the new president and they'd have one of their lobbyists call up and they'd say hillary, i'm sorry, you can't do that, they gave you $2 million for your campaign. can't do that, hillary. ok, i won't do that.

with me, i'm putting my money up, folks. i'm putting my money up. putting my money up. we're raising money for reince and for the rnc, but that's for a lot of other reasons. we are putting - i'm putting a lot of money up. i financed my - i funded, not financed, i wish i financed, right? i funded but i funded my primaries and i spent less than anybody else in terms of the measures. so, here's a story - wouldn't that be nice?

i spent less and won in a landslide. other people spent much, much more. three, four, five times more and they came in seventh. who the hell do you want to have as your president, right? right? right? oh, boy, and then they don't like me - couple of them, most of them have really supported us, but some of them just can't get over it. you know what i say to them? get over it. we're just having fun. get over it.

you signed a pledge, i hereby guarantee that i will endorse whoever wins - you know, the funny thing, all those pledges, you know they were signed for different - they were signed so that i would sign it. and i would have honored it, i will say. even if i wasn't fond or didn't like - i would have honored it because a pledge is a very important thing. but here's the thing. so, we are going to take these companies that haven't left - now, i'm looking at your numbers folks, you're not doing too well.

you're not doing too well here. pennsylvania has lost one in three manufacturing jobs since - you know, that's massive, since nafta. nafta was signed by bill clinton and i believe it's the single worst trade document ever signed in the history of our country and probably in the history of our world.

it's one of the most one-sided documents that i've ever seen. and it allowed mexico and places to do unbelievably well at our expense. and did you see where say, i'm going to renegotiate nafta, i'm going to—tpp disaster. ok, don't worry. don't worry.

and hillary was in favor of tpp. she said it's the gold standard. thank you for reminding me. i like this guy. it's the gold standard. tpp. transpacific partnership. it is going to be—i don't think you can be worse than nafta honestly. but it's going to be as bad as nafta. so tpp, she said it is the gold standard. she's reading it from a teleprompter. it is the gold standard—oh, boy. our country is in trouble. our country is in trouble. our country is in trouble.

so she said it's the gold standard. but when she heard me make a speech, as i understand it. and she heard me talking very negatively about it. as an example, they don't talk devaluation, which is the single greatest tool that these countries are using to kill the united states, including china. they devalue their currency. well, it doesn't happen. number one thing is not mentioned.

so complicated, this agreement. too many countries. by the way, i believe trade. i believe in trade deals. one country at a time. boom. boom. boom. you got to see the lines. we'll have one line. and if they don't do well.

if they don't behave themselves, if they want to start devaluing their currency all over the place, very simple, we write them a notice like we do in business. we serve them with a 30 day notice.

and by the way, you just saw, how great are our police, right?

law and order. we need law and order. we need law and order and we will have law and order. our police, our firemen - but our police do a fantastic job. they are not recognized for the great job they do. if they have 500,000 incidents all positively, beautifully handled, one bad thing happens, that one bad thing is on the news for two weeks and it's a disgrace. it's a disgrace.

so we should be very thankful for the job they do. so, pennsylvania is losing a lot of its business. right now, we're sitting here, we're talking - oh, here's another one. go home to mom. go home to mom.

and your mother is voting for trump! she's voting for trump. it's true. it's true.

by the way, just to interject - so i was told this whole area is democratic, meaning democrat. and i was told that by a lot of different people outside and then they said i can't believe that you have 10,000 people, you have people outside trying to get in.

they said, the came up to me, this is - happens to be a democrat who i happen to know is a good guy—came up to me and said i've never seen anything like it. it always goes democrat. is that a correct statement? said, you are going to win erie in a and the surrounding area - you're going to win in a landslide. gonna be a landslide.

because people are tired of lies, they're tired of losing their jobs, they're tired of seeing their companies being ripped out and going to other places. they're tired of china coming in and dropping steel all over the place to put your companies out of business, so we have to go to china to get our steel, which is happening very quickly.

and that's why the steel workers are with me, that's why the miners are with me, that's why the working people, electricians, the plumbers, the sheetrockers, the concrete guys and gals, they're all - they're with us.

and i grew up, you know they say, you know you're really rich, how come you sort of relate to these people? well, my father built houses and i used to work in these houses and i got to know the electricians, i got to know all these people, i got to know the plumbers, the steamfitters—i got to know them all.

and i liked them better than the rich people that i know. i know a lot of rich people. it's true. they're better. i like them better.

so, anyway—and, we are going to put people back to work. we're not playing games. and it's going to go quickly. by the way, it's going to go quickly.

but look at this, ok. so, erie, has lost one in three manufacturing jobs. you know that, all i—you do—i flew over, you're looking at the plants, plants that 25 years ago, 20 years ago, 15 years ago, some two years ago, were vibrant.

but no plant two years ago was too vibrant because it was down to half, down to a quarter, down to a tenth, and then ultimately they closed, but you see them. they are falling over. the rain, the sleet, the snow, the wind. these are great buildings that are falling apart. don't feel bad, all over the country. upstate new york is a disaster, which hillary clinton said that she was going to fix.

ok, so the washington post is extraordinarily dishonest and that's fine. but they wrote a story, i couldn't believe i saw this story, they talked about hillary clinton. it was a headline, hillary clinton and when she ran for the united states senator from new york, she said to the people in upstate new york, which was starting to really have problems because of her husband's bill nafta.

and companies were leaving, tremendous unemployment, tremendous problems, making nothing and she said i will turn it around, i will create 200,000 jobs, we're going to do a great job. guess what? she got elected, she did nothing. and the only ones that benefited were the consultants and the people that helped her out. it is a disaster. upstate new york is right now worse than anything you have in the state of pennsylvania, she did nothing.

and i watched her yesterday, which was hard to do, because she is boring, ok?

i watched her yesterday talking about—you know what's funny? i said i'm going to renegotiate nafta and they said what happens if you can't make a deal, i said we're going to terminate, we're getting out. and

so i've been saying that and i've been saying we're going to renegotiate different trade deals, and we're going to make great trade deals and all this and she's never said that. all of a sudden, two days ago, i will renegotiate trade deals. she's not going to do it, folks. she's going to renegotiate trade deals the same way she was going to put 200,000 jobs in upstate new york.

it turned out to be a total fantasy and i have to tell you, i respect the washington post for writing one bad story. because you what they're doing? and reince was alluding to it a little bit, the only way she gets elected is if they don't report on her. they don't show her. they have me on so much television. there's cnn, you talk about dishonesty, it's called the clinton—wait—it's called the clinton news network, cnn. now, think of it, clinton is

she's hardly ever on. so yesterday, they have yesterday, a scandal with the emails, another one. i'm not talking about the 33,000 emails that she deleted or got rid of. can you imagine what was on those emails? can you imagine? i love that. can you imagine what was on those emails, 33,000 emails were deleted. and she said well it had to do with the wedding and yoga.

i give two to yoga, i give five to the wedding. i'll tell you, the lies, the deception. we're running like they run right now a third world country folks, ok? you saw what happened, it's running like a third world country, we're being talked about all over the world, nobody can believe it.

in fact, when they were going over the charges against hillary clinton, one after another after another after another, however, and yet other people, their lives have been destroyed for doing much less, all right?

their lives have been destroyed. so now they have a big scandal in new york. it's in the new york papers, but very little. pay right? pay for play. and it's horrifying, it's horrifying. our government is for sale. our government is for sale by a crooked person. and what they're doing is they're trying to not talk about her. take a look. you go to cnn as an example. story after story about trump. story—trump. trump. trump. trump.

and yesterday, it was announced that people are tired of negative—the hit jobs and cnn's starting to do very poorly. that's good. i like that. i like that. and i have to say, fox has been treating us fairly. fox has been fair. but cnn has been catastrophic. it's so dishonest.

but somebody was explaining to me their theory. if they don't report on her, people aren't going to know how bad she is. look at her news conference. she hasn't had a news conference in like 260 days. that last one wasn't a news conference. that was a few of her friends. they asked her a question. what did she say about the circuit, right? let me tell you, if i ever said that, short- circuited, if i ever said i short-circuited, it would be headlines all over the world. they would call for the death penalty.

can you imagine if i said that i short-circuited? i mean, i stand up here for months in front of massive crowds, she gets 300 people going to her events. she gets 300 people and then she reads something from a teleprompter and then she leaves and she goes home and she goes to sleep.

and then she wakes and she goes again. and i'm telling you—and nobody does anything about it. now me, i stand up here—i'm not looking at notes. i'm not reading teleprompters. not easy. not easy. not easy.

but—but—remember—but—and if i make one mistake  say, he mention something wrong. he got a wrong date. it's like headlines all over. she can say she short-circuited up here. i don't want a president who short-circuits. is that ok? i don't want it. i don't want a president who short-circuits.

we've got to deal with isis. we've got to deal with china. we've got to deal with lots of people. they're not short-circuiting. but i don't want somebody that short-circuits. so let me just tell you—let me just tell you.

over the last little while—you know, every time, it's always a big deal. when i said that obama—and of course, i'm being sarcastic. and they know that because after i said that, i said he's the mvp, he's going to collect his mvp award. ok.

so i said obama is the founder of isis. the founder.

and these dishonest media people—they're the most dishonest people. they said oh, did he mean that? didn't he mean that? and after that, i'd say a lot—in fact, they like him so much because he's been so weak and so bad. i mean, he let this happen. they had eight states. they had eight countries. they're now in 28 countries. they're expanding.

so i said the founder of—obviously, i'm being sarcastic. then—then—but not that sarcastic, to be honest with you.

and they all said, he should not say that. they should call him an enabler. call him an enabler. he's an enabler. i said, that doesn't sound the same. he's an enabler. people are going to say what's—these people are the worst. but listen, so i said the founder of isis. and in fact, very soon he's going over to pick up his most valuable player award. did i say that? i say it all the time. trump: so they knew i was being sarcastic. by now they're analyzing. did i really mean that? how could i say that? these people are the lowest form of life. i'm telling you. the lowest.

they are the lowest form of humanity. not all of them. they have about 25 percent that are pretty good, actually. but most of them.

ok. so, here's the story. so erie has lost a lot. right? you know that, right? hang in, don't leave. i promise we can fix it so fast. we will stop these countries from taking our jobs. we will stop these countries from taking our companies. hold on.

our jobs will come back. now, i came up with a great plan. i'm lowering corporate taxes so our companies stay, so i don't even have to make the call. the corporate inversions - you know, we have companies that have, they say, two and a half trillion dollars outside of our comp - they can't get their money back. we don't let them.

everybody agrees that we should do it. republicans, democrats, everybody agrees.

what's the - look, why do we not want them to bring money back? you know why? because we don't have a president that can sit the leaders of both parties around a table and in about five minutes let them say let's bring this money back in so we can work it in this country, right?

that's what it is. so we're going to bring that money back in, we're going to lower taxes, we're going to keep our companies - and if our companies want to leave, they're going to pay a nice big beautiful tax to get their product back in.

ok? that's what's going to happen. so, the existing u.s. trade deficit with tpp participating nations has already cost pennsylvania 68,000 jobs, folks. no more, folks.

we're not going to be stupid people any more, we're going to be the really, really smart people. it's going to be america first. america first. america first. first.

so, the destruction of manufacturing in pennsylvania was caused by hillary clinton's and her husband's disastrous trade policies.

i mean, you take a look at what she's done. at the bidding of her corporate funders, hillary clinton has backed every job-killing trade deal for decades. she has received so much money, she has approved virtually every tax increase put before her.

yesterday - you see 1.3 trillion in tax increases. we're the highest taxed nation in the land, essentially. we're the highest taxed nation in the world. anywhere in the world.

and of the industrialized nations, we're far and away the highest taxed nation. and she's proposing a massive tax increase. folks, we can't do it. it's going to make our country non-competitive - it's already non-competitive.

it's going to make our country non-competitive and we're not going to do it. i'm proposing a massive tax decrease for the middle class, for business, and businesses are going to pour in - not since ronald reagan has anything like this been proposed.

businesses instead of leaving because their taxes are so high, they're going to stay. i might not even have to make those calls. now, if i do, i will, meaning my people will. i'll do some, i love doing it. i would love telling some guy you're not moving. well, mr. president, sir, we would like to move to mexico. you're not moving and if you do you pay the 35 percent tax. you say well, in that case, i'm not moving, i'm not moving. in that case, i'm not moving. so easy.

so, your coal industry, your steel industry, which has been ravaged, your general electrics of the world, which have been ravaged, just ravaged, we're going to end it and i'll tell you why. over the years, i've watched. for years, for 10 years, for 12 years, for 15 years, beyond obama, and i've watched as politicians talked about stopping countries from leaving - companies from leaving our states. you need strength, is right.

our states. and i watched. remember they give the low-interest loans? here's a low-interest loan if you stay in pennsylvania, here's a zero-interest loan, you don't have to pay, here's a this, here's tax abatement of any kind you want, we'll help your - it doesn't work, folks, that's not what they need. they have money.

they want to go out, they want to move to another country and because our politicians are so dumb, they want to sell their product to us and not have any retribution, not have any consequences.

so all of that's over and i think you understand it and hillary can't do it. number one, she can't do it because the mentality isn't there. she can't do it. no, the mentality.

you know, she said fairly recently, i don't like 's tone. his tone isn't nice. and i said, here we have a country that's being taken advantage of by every country in the world. our businesses are being taken. our jobs being taken. everything's being taken.

here we have a world where isis is chopping off the heads of christians and many others, drowning people in steel cages, burying people in the sand, and we have somebody up there who wants to be our president that says, i don't like 's tone.

folks, we better get smart, folks. hey, look, let's see what happens. we better get smart. we better get smart.

we better get smart. we better get tough. and if we're not smart and we're not tough, we're not going to have a country left. and one of the things i have to talk to you about before i leave is our borders. illegal immigrants are pouring into our country. in fact, i brought something for you people. i brought—i brought—i had to do this. i didn't want to depress you. ok, look. the clinton legacy.

nearly one in three manufacturing jobs in erie, pa—erie, pa, sound familiar—have been lost since clinton allowed a certain deal with china to happen. now, look at this—look at this chart. this is 2001, not long ago. this is now. congratulations, folks. i hope you're doing well. ok? i hope you're doing well. i don't want to hurt them. i hope you're doing well.

but you know what? you can't do well. when you have a government that is so stupid, that is so—that is so incompetent, you can't do it. here's another one, folks. this is what we're talking about. syrian refugees—we have no idea who they are, where they're coming from, no paperwork. you saw what happened in san bernardino. you saw what happened—frankly, take a look at all over the world. take a look at what's happening.

if we don't get smart and we don't get smart fast—barack obama is allowing syrian refugees to come into our country by the thousands. now, i have as big a heart as anybody in this room and i want to build safe zones and i want, by the way, the gulf states to pay for it because they've got plenty of money and they're not doing much. ok? we'll supervise it. opm, other people's money. we'll supervise it, right? we'll supervise it.

but they're going to pay for it because we're protecting these people. if it weren't for the united states, those countries wouldn't even exist. they'd be gone. the power we have is so enormous, but we have people that don't know what they're doing. we have an incompetent president. we have people that don't know what they're doing.

so look at this. look at this. syrian refugees admitted to the united states on a monthly basis. look what's happening. look what's happening.

now, in all fairness, we want to help people. can't take a chance. san bernardino, they walk in. they start shooting. paris, the best, the toughest gun laws in the world, paris, france. they walk in. they kill 130 people. they wound so gravely hundreds of people.

now, let me just tell you because well—we're on the second amendment, right, second amendment. if we had in san bernardino—if we had in san bernardino or in orlando or someplace, somebody in that room like this guy right here, right, or that guy with the blue make america great again hat on or the one with the red make america—or that woman with the beautiful blonde hair. i wish i had hair that looked like that.

but if we had somebody and they happened to have a gun, san bernardino, they see him come in—first of all, if they knew there was a gun where the bullets would be flying in the other direction, they probably wouldn't have got  in, ok? but let's assume they did.

the carnage would not have been what the carnage was. we have to protect our second amendment. hillary clinton wants to kill our second amendment.

she wants to kill it.

so here's our chart. and i was thinking about doing a—i bring—every once in a—like, one in ten i do it, you know a lot of these. i love the people. we have such a movement going on. who likes the snake? do you know the snake? do you like it? who likes the snake? here we are with this. we know bad things are going to happen. we know as we allow more and more people to come in from these terror areas, bad things are going to happen.

has anybody heard the snake? not that many? should i do it again? so think of this, folks, think of this, think of it. this is what is going on in our country with our borders. and by the way, we're going to have a strong border, we're going to have a wall, it's going to be a powerful wall that mexico's going to pay for the wall.

and we have no choice, and we have no choice. but think of this. this is now a situation where this was written by al wilson many years ago and i read it and i said you know that really pertains to what's happening to the united states and it has to do with being fooled, it has to do with a lot of different things but when you're listening to this, think of our border, think of the people that we're letting in by the thousands and hillary clinton, you saw those numbers right? with the chart, it's through the roof.

hillary clinton wants to allow 550 percent more coming into our country. how stupid are we? so, are you ready, you ready, you like it, you sure? on her way to work one morning, down the path along the lake, a tender hearted woman saw a poor, half-frozen snake, his pretty colored skin had been all frosted with the dew. oh well, she cried, i'll take you in and i'll take care of you.

take me in, oh tender woman, take me in for heaven's sake, take me in oh tender woman, sighed the broken snake. she wrapped him up, all cozy, in a curvature of silk. then laid him by the fireside with some honey and some milk. now she hurried home from work that night. as soon as she arrived, she found that pretty snake she'd taken in, had been revived. take me in oh tender woman, take me in for heaven's sake.

take me in oh tender woman, sighed the broken snake. now she clutched him to her bosom. you're so beautiful, she cried. but if i hadn't brought you in by now, you certainly would have died. now she stroked his pretty skin and then she kissed and held him tight. but instead of saying thank you, that snake gave her a vicious bite. take me in oh tender woman, take me in for heaven's sake.

take me in oh tender woman, sighed the vicious snake. i saved you, i saved you, i saved you, cried that woman. and you've bit me, heaven's why. you know your bite is poisonous and now i'm going to die. oh shut up, silly woman, said the reptile with a grin. you knew damn well i was a snake before you took me in.

get ready folks, get ready. we're led by stupid people. we're led by leaders and you know honestly, i didn't need this. this i didn't need. i had a nice life, built a great company—a great company, some of the great real estate assets of the world. i may never see them. you know if i win, i may never see them again, and i love them—all over the world.

but you know what? this is so important. and i watched what was happening with the iran deal, and i watched what was happening with jobs, and i watched what was happening with trade where china makes $500 billion in trade deficits with us.

i look and i saw. take a look at mexico. you know, the politicians say, you'll never, ever be able to get mexico to allow you to build a wall. i say trust me. now, they don't say that anymore. now they say, they won't put the money up to build a wall. so easy. mexico—our trade deficit is massive, massive. they make a fortune off the stupidity of the united stated.

mexico will 100 percent—you hear—100 percent pay for the wall, 100 percent.

ok? one hundred percent. but the story of the snake is what's happening to our country. we're letting people in. many of these people hate us. many of these people don't have good thoughts. and you see what one person can do—one sick wacko can do in orlando. and then you see his father sitting behind hillary clinton with a big smile on his face—with a big, fat smile on his face, right?

and he was wearing a red hat, and i said, i hope that's not one of my hats. it wasn't. i was concerned. i saw that hat. i said, i hope it doesn't say make america great again. bad guy—bad guy. horrendous son—horrendous son.

so here's the story, folks. we have to win—we have to win pennsylvania, so important. so

hillary clinton is run by people that do this very professionally. they're very good. they keep her out of the spotlight. she doesn't talk to reporters—very rarely. she doesn't do press conferences. she doesn't expose whatever's going on up here. she doesn't—which isn't good. she doesn't expose her mind to questions. and what they want to do is they want to try and fake it through.

we need strength. we need toughness. we need a strong temperament. we need a strong tone. at the same time—at the same time, let me tell you—at the same time, we need real, big, beautiful heart because we have to straighten out healthcare. obamacare's going to be repealed and replaced.

it's going to repay—did you see—did you see what's happening with obamacare? did you see where the numbers are going up 30, 40, and 50 percent? wait until you see what happens on november 1st. now, on november 1st, they're trying to delay it.

but you're going to get increases, the likes of which probably no country, nobody has ever seen. ok? anybody in the history of healthcare—in texas, through going through blue cross blue shield, they just had almost a 50 percent increase in their premiums.

and the deductibles are so high that unless you get hit by one of those general electric locomotives and you live for like a long time prior to death, you'll never, ever be able to use your healthcare—the healthcare. because here's what's happened—here's what's happened. the deductible is so high, you never get to use it.

so, you're spending money, your deductibles raises by 17, 18, 19 percent. but now, it's going to go really bad, really bad. it's going to die of its own volition, but we have to kill it first. it's killing our country, it's killing our jobs—it's killing our jobs.

so, here's the story, folks—folks. we have to win pennsylvania. we have to beat this professional group of people that are running her for her own—for their own purposes. we have to win pennsylvania. we win pennsylvania, we're going to win it. you know, we're up in florida. we're doing well in ohio. and i'm hearing we're doing well here. we'll find out.

here's the story...

here's the story. we have to win the state of pennsylvania. i went to school here. my kids went to school here. we're going to win pennsylvania.

if we win pennsylvania, i'll tell you what. we are very much on our way. you know, the republicans do have a tougher path, just so you—not my fault. not my fault. it's a tougher path.

for the presidency, it's just a tougher, winding road. but if win pennsylvania, we win florida where we're doing really well, i think we can win ohio, it'll be over. it'll be over. it'll be over.

so, on november 8th, you have to get out and vote or do some balloting, and i don't care—look, here's the story. if you're not feeling well, if you're so sick, if you go to your doctor and he goes, i'm sorry sir, but you've only got a few weeks left. and it's november 1st. and he gives you the ultimate word, not looking good. you haven't got long left. i don't care and nobody else in this room cares. you have to on november 8th get out of bed and get out and vote, right? get out and vote.

now, in a lot of cases, you can do your early ballots too. all i'm telling you though—look, folks. i'm just saying your jobs have been taken. your military and all of the other things, we're going to save your second amendment, which is protection, we're going to get of common core, you're going to bring your education locally.

all things—i'm going to repeal and replace obamacare. all these things. we're going to take care of our vets. but here's the story, folks. for you people in particular because you have been devastated.

supreme court, he said. yes. yes. thank you. who did that? who said that? thank you.

by the way, and i have to just stop for a second. look, supreme court justice scalia great. was supposed to live for a long time. he died. so you have already an empty. this next president could have the most supreme court nominations of any president. could take more justices than—it could be up to five. probably going to be three, could be four, could be five. ok?

if hillary clinton gets to put hard-leaning left judges on the supreme court, number one, your second amendment will be gone. our country will never ever be the same. we will have problems like we've never had before and you won't have—you will have a whole different deal going, which we don't want, believe me.

so, here's the story. if for no other reason, i am going to put—and you know, i've picked through federalist society—we picked 11 supreme court justices. we're going to add probably four more, all vetted through federalists, through heritage, highly—i actually got very good marks. we're going to pick these people or people very like that.

so, here's the story, here's the story. you ready? we don't win anymore, you people don't win, that's for sure. you just have to look at the statistics for jobs. we're going to start winning again. we're going to win so much that you're going to get sick and tired of winning.

you're going to say mr. president—you're going to send the congressman to see me in washington. he's going to say, mr. president, we have to do something. the people of pennsylvania, and in particular our friends in erie, they're sick and tired of winning. they can't stand winning so much. mr. president, we just don't want to win that much. we really want to give other nations like it used to be, where it's good for them and bad for us, at least a little bit.

and i'm going to say—i'm going to say, mr. congressman, i don't think you know your people very well, they want to win. and we want to win. and you want to win. and we're going to win. we're going to win so much. we're going to win with our military, we're going to knock the hell out of isis.

we're going to win for our vets. we're going to take of our vets. we're going to win at the border, we're going to build a wall, we're going to have mexico pay, believe me 100 percent. we're going to win with education. we're going to win for our second amendment. we're going to win on all of the things we discussed. we're going to win again and you're going to be proud of your country again.

we're not going to be the people that are laughed at all over the world for not knowing what we're doing, for allowing others to come in and just strip us of what we have.

we are going to win. we are going to be america first.

we are going to make america great again. and it's going to happen quickly.

thank you everybody, thank you.
thank you, everybody, thank you very much. it's great to be with you this afternoon and today we begin a conversation on how to make america safe again. in the twentieth century, the united states has defeated fascism, nazism and communism. now, a different threat faces our world: radical islamic terrorism.

this summer, there's been an isis attack launched outside the warzones of the middle east--hard to believe--every eighty-four hours. here in america, we have seen one brutal attack after another: thirteen were murdered and thirty-eight wounded in the assault on fort hood. the boston marathon bombing wounded and maimed sixty-four people, and ultimately left five dead, including two of our great police officers . in chattanooga, tennessee, five unarmed marines--unbelievable people, by the way--were shot and killed at a military recruiting center.

last september, fourteen innocent americans were gunned down at an office party in san bernardino; another twenty-two were very gravely injured. in june, forty-nine americans were executed at the pulse nightclub in orlando . another fifty-three were badly injured. it was the worst mass shooting in our history, and the attack, by far, the worst on the lgbtq community, and i'll tell you what: we can never, ever allow this to happen again.

in europe--thank you--in europe we have seen the same carnage and bloodshed afflicted upon our closest allies. in january of 2015, a french satirical newspaper, charlie hebdo, was attacked for publishing cartoons of the prophet mohammed. twelve were killed, including two police officers, and 11 were wounded. two days later, four were murdered in a jewish delicatessen. in november of 2015 terrorist went on a shooting rampage in paris that slaughtered 130 people, and wounded another 368 people, some in very, very, very bad shape today.

france is suffering gravely. and the tourism industry is being massively affected in the most negative way. in march of this year terrorists detonated a bomb in brussels airport killing 32 and injuring 340 people. this july in the south of france an islamic terrorist turned his truck into an instrument of mass murder, plowing down and killing 85 men, women and children and wounding 308 people.

terrible. among the dead were two americans, a texas father and his 11-year-old son. a few weeks ago in germany a refugee armed with an axe wounded 5 people in a gruesome train attack. only days ago an isis killer invaded a christian church in normandy, france forced an 85- year-old priest to his knees. a priest who was beloved, who was beloved; before cutting his throat and just unthinkable other things.

overseas isis has carried out an absolute atrocity and one after another. children slaughtered, girls sold into slavery, men and women burned alive, crucifixions, beheadings, and drownings, ethnic minorities targeted for mass execution. holy sites desecrated. christians driven from their homes and hunted for extermination. isis rounding up what it calls 'nation of the cross', 'nation of the cross' in a campaign of absolute and total genocide.

we cannot let this evil continue.  thank you. thank you.

nor can we let the hateful ideology of radical islam, it's oppression of women, gays, children and non-believers be allowed to reside or spread within our own countries.  we will defeat radical islamic terrorism just as we have defeated every threat we've faced at every age and before. but we will not, we will not, remember this, defeat it with closed eyes or silenced voices. we have a president that doesn't want to say the words.

anyone who cannot name our enemy is not fit to lead our country.  anyone who cannot condemn the hatred, oppression and violence of radical islam lacks the moral clarity to serve as our president.  the rise of isis is the direct result of policy decisions made by president obama and secretary of state clinton. let's look back at the middle east at the very beginning of 2009 before the obama-clinton administration took over.

libya was stable. syria was under control. egypt was ruled by a secular president and an ally of the united states.

iraq was experiencing a reduction in violence. the group that would become what we now call isis was close to being extinguished. iran was being choked off by economic sanctions.

fast forward to today. what we have--and think of this--and the decisions made by the obama/clinton group have been absolutely disastrous.

libya is in ruins. our ambassador and three other really brave americans are dead. and isis has gained a new base of operations.

syria is in the midst of a disastrous civil war. isis controls large portions of territory. a refugee crisis now threatens europe and the united states.

in egypt, terrorists have gained a foothold in the sinai desert near the suez canal, one of the most essential waterways of the world. iraq is in chaos. and isis is on the loose. isis has spread across the middle east and into the west.

in 2014, isis was operating in seven nations. they were in seven nations. terrible, but that's what it was.

today they're fully operational in 18 countries with aspiring branches in six more for a total of 24. and many believe that number is actually 28 to 30 countries. they don't even know.

the situation is likely worse than the public has any idea. a new congressional report reveals that the administration has downplayed the growth of isis with 40 percent of analysts saying they had experience efforts to manipulate their findings in trying to make it look much better than it is. it's bad.

at the same time, isis is trying to infiltrate refugee flows into europe and to the united states. iran, the world's largest state sponsor of terrorism, is not flush with $150 billion in cash released by the united states. plus if you remember from two weeks ago, another $400 million in actual cash that was obviously used for ransom.

worst of all, the nuclear deal puts iran, the number one state sponsor of radical islamic terrorism, on a path to nuclear weapons. in short, the obama/clinton foreign policy has unleashed isis, destabilized the middle east, and put the nation of iran, which chants, "death to america", in a dominant position of regional power and in fact aspiring a dominant world power.

it all began in 2009 with what has become known as president obama's global apology tour. we all remember. we all remember.  in a series of speeches, president obama described america as arrogant, dismissive, derisive, and a colonial power. he was describing us.

he informed other countries that he would be speaking up about america's past errors. he pledged that we would no longer be a senior partner that sought to dictate our terms. he lectured cia officers of the need to acknowledge their mistakes, and described guantanamo bay as a rallying cry for our enemies.

perhaps no speech was more misguided than president obama's speech to the muslim world, delivered in cairo, egypt, 2009. i remember it well.

in winning the cold war, president ronald reagan repeatedly touted the superiority of freedom over communism and called the ussr the evil empire. yet when president obama delivered his address in cairo, no such moral courage could be found or would be found. instead of condemning the oppression of women and gays in many muslim nations, and the systematic violations of human rights, or the financing of global terrorism, president obama tried to draw an equivalency between our human rights record--and remember this, our human rights--and theirs.

the records are unbelievable and unmistakable.

his naive words were followed by even more naive actions. the failure to establish a new status of forces agreement in iraq and the election-driven timetable for withdrawal surrendered our gains in that country and led directly to the rise of isis without question.

the failures in iraq were compounded by hillary clinton's disaster, total disaster, in libya. president obama has since said that he regrets, and really regrets, libya and the mistake he made. he considers it his worst mistake. according to then-secretary of defense robert gates, the invasion of libya was nearly a split decision, but hillary clinton's forceful advocacy for the intervention was the deciding factor. that's why we went in.

with one episode of bad judgment after another, hillary clinton's policies launched isis onto the world stage. yet, as she threw the middle east into violent turmoil, things turned out really to be not so hot for our world and our country. the middle east in particular.

the clintons made almost $60,000 in gross income while she was secretary of state. it is unbelievable. incident after incident proves again and again hillary clinton lacks the judgment--as said by bernie sanders--stability and temperament and the moral character to lead our nation.

importantly, she also lacks the mental and physical stamina to take on isis and all of the many adversaries we face. not only in terrorism, but in trade and every other challenge we must confront to turn our great country around.

it is now time for a new approach. our current strategy of nation- building and regime-change is a proven, absolute failure. we have created the vacuums that allow terrorism to grow and thrive. i was an opponent of the iraq war from the beginning. a major difference between me and my opponent. though i was a private citizen whose personal opinions on such matters were really not sought, i nonetheless publicly expressed my private doubts about the invasion. i was against, believe me.

three months before the invasion i said in an interview with neil cavuto to whom i offer my best wishes for a speedy recovery, that "perhaps we shouldn't be doing it yet. and that the economy is a much bigger problem."

in august of 2004, very early, right after the conflict, i made a detailed statement to esquire magazine in an interview. here's the quote in full. "look at the war in iraq and the mess we're in. i would never have handled it that way." this was right after the invasion. "does anybody really believe that iraq is going to be a wonderful democracy where people are going to run down to the voting box and gently put in their ballot and the winner is happily going to go and step up and lead the country? c'mon."

i then continued, "two minutes after we leave there's going to be a revolution and the meanest, toughest, smartest most viscous guy, in this case, guy, will take over. and he'll have weapons of mass destruction which saddam hussein did not have.

"what was the purpose of this whole thing? hundreds and hundreds of young people killed. and what about the people coming back with no arms and no legs? not to mention, in all fairness, the other side. the tremendous damage done. all those iraqi kids who've been blown to pieces. and it turns out that all of the reasons for the war were blatantly wrong. all of this death and destruction for nothing."

so i've been clear for a long time that we should not have gone in. but i have been just as clear in saying what a catastrophic mistake hillary clinton and president obama made with the reckless way in which they pulled out.

after we had made those hard fought sacrifices and gains we should have never made such a sudden withdrawal on a timetable advertised to our enemies. they said, we're moving out, here's our time, here's our date. who would do this but an incompetent president?

al qaeda in iraq had been decimated. and obama and clinton gave it new life and allowed it to spread all across the world. by that same token president obama and hillary clinton should have never attempted to build a democracy in libya, to push for immediate regime change in syria or to support the overthrow of mubarak in egypt.

one more point on this. i have long said that we should have kept the oil in iraq.  i said it over and over and over again. another area where my judgment has been proven correct. i just said it so many times, virtually every time i was interviewed, keep the oil, keep the oil.

according to cnn, isis made as much as $500,000 in oil sales in 2014 alone. that's before they really got started. fueling and funding its reign of terror. if we had controlled the oil like i said we should, we could have prevented the rise of isis in iraq, both by cutting off a major source of funding and through the presence of u.s. forces necessary to safeguard the oil and vital infrastructure products necessary for us to have the oil.

i was saying this constantly and consistently to whomever would listen. i said, "keep the oil. keep the oil. keep the oil. don't let somebody else get it."  if they had listened to me then we would have had the economic benefits of the oil which i wanted to use to help take care of the wounded soldiers and families of those who died in the war.  in addition to which thousands of lives would have been saved. this proposal by its very nature would have left soldiers in place of our assets. we would have had soldiers there guarding this valuable supply of oil. in the old days, when we won a war, to the victor belonged the spoils.  instead, all we got from iraq and our ventures in the middle east, was death, destruction and tremendous financial loss. but it's time to put the mistakes of the past behind us and chart a new course.

if i become president, the era of nation-building will be brought to a very swift and decisive end.  thank you. our new approach--which must be shared by both parties in america, by our allies overseas and by our friends in the middle east--must be to halt the spread of radical islam. all actions should be oriented around this goal and any country which shares this goal will be our ally. very important. some don't share this goal. we cannot always choose our friends but we can never fail to recognize our enemies.

as president, i will call for an international conference focused on this goal. we will work side by side with our friends in the middle east, including our greatest ally israel.  we will partner with king abdullah of jordan and the president of egypt, president sisi, and all others who recognize this ideology of death that must be extinguished.

we will also work very closely with nato on this new mission. i had previously said that nato was obsolete because it failed to deal adequately with terrorism. since my comments, they have changed their policy and now have a new division focused on terror threats. very good. very, very good.

i also believe that we could find common ground with russia in a fight against isis. wouldn't that be a good thing? wouldn't that be a good thing?  they, too, have much at stake in the outcome in syria, and have had their own battles with islamic terrorism just as bad as ours. they have a big, big problem in russia with isis.

my administration will aggressively pursue joint and coalition military operations to crush and destroy isis. international cooperation to cut off their funding. expanded intelligence sharing, and cyber warfare to disrupt and disable their propaganda and recruiting. their recruiting is taking place right now, and they're setting records. it's got to be stopped.

we cannot allow the internet to be used as a recruiting tool and for other purposes by our enemy. we must shut down their access to this form of communication, and we must do it immediately--immediately.

unlike hilary clinton, who has risked so many lives with her careless of handling of sensitive information, my administration will not telegram exactly military plans and what they are.  and by the way, what's happened with her 33,000 e-mails is an absolute disgrace to the united states of america.

i've often said that the great general douglas macarthur and the great general george patton would be in a state of shock if they were alive today to see the way president obama and hillary clinton tried to recklessly announce their every move before it happens. like they did in iraq, so that the enemy can prepare and adapt. their enemy says, "thank you."

the fight will not be limited to isis. we will decimate al- qaeda. and we will seek to starve funding for iran-backed hamas and hezbollah.  so important. we can use existing u.n. security council resolutions to apply new and even stronger sanctions. military, cyber and financial warfare will all be necessary to dismantle islamic terrorism.

but we must use ideological warfare as well. very important. and they use it on us, better than we have ever even thought of using it on them. but that will change.

just as we won, just as we won the cold war in part by exposing the evils of communism and the virtues of free markets, so too must we take on the ideology of radical islam. while my opponent accepted millions of dollars in foundation donations from countries where being gay is an offense punishable by prison or death, my administration will speak out against the oppression of women, gays and people of different beliefs.

our administration would be a friend to all moderate muslim reformers in the middle east and will amplify their voices. this includes speaking out against the horrible practice of honor killings, where women are murdered by their relatives for dressing, marrying or acting in a way that violates fundamentalist teachings. over 1,000 pakistani girls are estimated to be the victims of honor killings by their relatives each year.

recently a prominent pakistani social media star was strangled to death by her brother on the charge of dishonoring the family. in his confession, the brother took pride in the murder and said, "girls are born to stay home and follow traditions." shockingly, this is a tradition that has reached our own shores. one such case, and many, many cases have happened--where one involves an iraqi immigrant who was sentenced to 34 years in jail for running over his own daughter, claiming she had been "too westernized."

to defeat islamic terrorism we must also speak our forcefully against a hateful ideology that provides the breeding ground for violence and terrorism to grow. it's a breeding ground. it's a terrible, terrible breeding ground.

a new immigration policy is needed immediately and as well.  the common thread linking the major islamic terror attacks that have recently occurred on our soil--9/11, the fort hood shooting, the boston bombing, the san bernardino attack, the orlando attack--is that they have involved immigrants or the children of immigrants.

clearly, new screening procedures are needed. a review by the u.s. senate immigration subcommittee has identified 380 foreign-born individuals charged with terrorism or terrorism-related offenses between 9/11 and 2014, and many more since then, and this year is a record for identification. it's gotten worse, far worse.

we also know that isis recruits refugees after their entrance into the country, as we have seen with the somali refugee population in minnesota.

beyond terrorism, as we have also seen in france, foreign populations have brought their anti-semitic attitudes with them. in cologne, germany on new years, we have seen the reports of sexual violence and assault far greater than anybody knows.

pew polling shows that in many of the countries from which we draw large number of immigrants--extreme views about religion such death penalty--and for those who are involved--the death penalty is very, very common if you don't have the faith that they demand you have.

a trump administration will establish a clear principle that will govern all decisions pertaining to immigration, and we will be tough, and we will be even extreme.  we should only admit into this country those who share our values and respect our people. in the cold war, we had an ideological screening test. the time is overdue to develop a new screening test for the threats we face today. i call it extreme vetting. i call it extreme--extreme vetting.

our country has enough problems. we don't need more, and these are problems like we've never had before. ] in addition to screening out all members of the sympathizers we must also screen out any with hostile attitudes toward our country or its principles, or who believe that sharia law should supplant american law.  those who do not believe in our constitution or who support bigotry or hatred will not be admitted for immigration into our country.  only those who we expect to flourish in our country, and to embrace a tolerant american society should be issued visas.  to put these new procedures in place, we will have to temporarily suspend immigration from some of the most dangerous and volatile regions of the world, that have a history of exporting terrorism, nor for us! not for us.

thank you. thank you. as soon as i take office, i will ask the state department and the department of homeland security to identify a list of regions where adequate screening cannot take place, there are many such regions. we will stop processing visas from those areas until such time as it is deemed safe to resume, based on new circumstances or new procedures. the size of current immigration flows are simply too large to perform adequate screening.  we admit about 100,000 permanent immigrants from the middle east every year . beyond that, we admit hundreds of thousands of temporary workers and visitors from the same regions--hundreds of thousands . if we don't control the numbers, we can't perform adequate screening. there's no way it can take place.

by contrast, my opponent wants to increase--which is unbelievable, no matter who you are, where you come from--wants to increase the flow of syrian refugees by 550% over what they are now.  the united states senate subcommittee on immigration estimates that hillary's plan would mean roughly 620,000 refugees from all current refugee-sending nations in her first term , assuming no cuts to other refugee programs--so it could get worse! this would be additional to all other non-refugee immigration. unbelievable numbers. unbelievable numbers. the subcommittee estimates her plan would impose a lifetime cost of roughly $400 billion when you include the cost of healthcare, welfare, housing, schooling and other entitlement benefits that are excluded from the state department's placement figures. think of this: $400 billion. in short, hillary clinton wants to be america's angela merkel.  and you know what a disaster this massive immigration has been to germany and the people of germany. crime has risen to levels that no one thought they would ever, ever see. it is a catastrophe. we have enough problems in our country. we don't need more.

lastly, we will need to restore common sense to our security procedures. another common feature of the past attacks that have occurred on our soil is that warning signs were totally ignored. the 9/11 hijackers had fraud all over their visa applications. almost every one of them. it said practically in big bold letters "fraud". and nobody saw it. the russians warned us about the boston bombers, here on political asylum, and the attackers were even twice interviewed by the fbi. very sad.

the female san bernardino shooter, on her--on her statements, and everything that she said: she was here on a fiancée visa, which most people have not even heard of, from saudi arabia, and she wanted to support very openly jihad online. these are the people we're taking in.

a neighbor saw suspicious behavior--bombs on the floor, and other things--but didn't warn authorities because they said they didn't want to be accused of racial profiling. now, many are dead and many more are gravely wounded.

the shooter in orlando reportedly celebrated in his classroom after 9/11 . he, too, was interviewed by the fbi. his father, a native of afghanistan, supported the oppressive taliban regime, and expressed anti-american views very strongly , and by the way, was just seen sitting behind hillary clinton with a big fat smile on his face, all the way through her speech.  he obviously liked what she had to say. it's called: weakness, weakness. it's called stupidity, and we've had it.

the fort hood shooter delivered a presentation to a room full of mental health experts before the attacks in which he threw out one red flag after another. he even proclaimed that we "love death more then you love life". not good. these warning signs were ignored because political correctness has replaced common sense in our society.  thank you. thank you.

that is why one of my first acts as president will be to establish a commission on radical islam, which will include reformers voices in the muslim community, who will hopefully work with us. we want to build bridges and erase divisions. the goal of the commission will be to identify and explain to the american public the core convictions and beliefs of radical islam, to identify the warning signs of radicalization, and to expose the networks in our society that support radicalization. this commission will be used to develop new protocols for local police officers, federal investigators and immigration screeners. and while i'm at it, we should give a hand to our great police officers and law enforcement officials.  thank you. thank you.

we will also keep open guantanamo bay and place a renewed emphasis on human intelligence. drone strikes will remain part of our strategy, but we will also seek to capture high-value targets to gain needed information to dismantle their organizations.  foreign combatants will be tried in military commissions.

finally, we will pursue aggressive criminal or immigration charges against anyone who lends materiel support to terrorism. there will be consequences for those people. there will be very serious consequences.  similar to the effort to take down the mafia, this will be the understood mission of every federal investigator and prosecutor in the country.  to accomplish a goal, you must state a mission. the support networks for radical islam in this country will be stripped out and removed, one-by-one, viciously if necessary--viciously if necessary. immigration offices will also have their powers restored. those have been taken away. those who are guests in our country that are preaching hate will be asked to return home immediately and if they don't immediately, we will return them home.

to make america safe again, we must work together again. our victory in the cold war relied on a bipartisan and international consensus. that is what we must have to defeat radical islamic terrorism.

but just like we couldn't defeat communism without acknowledging that communism exists, or explaining its horrible evils, we can't defeat radical islamic terrorism unless we do the exact same thing. we have to explain that it exists, and explain the difficulties. we have to have a leader that can do that, and we do not have that now.

but this also means that we have to promote the exceptional virtues of our own way of life. we have an exceptional country, an exceptional way of life. but it's being tread on by sick, sick people. and expecting that as newcomers come into our society, they will likewise have respect and do the same. pride in our institutions, our history and our values should be taught by parents and teachers and impressed upon all of those that come into our society and want to join our society.

assimilation is not an act of hostility, but an expression of compassion. our system of government and our american culture is the best in the world, and we'll produce the best outcomes for all who adopt it.  thank you. thank you.

this approach will not only make us safer, but bring us closer together as a country. renewing the spirit of americanism will help heal the divisions in our country, of which there are so many. we have a divider as president. we call him the great divider. it's the thing he best.  it will do so by emphasizing what we have in common, not what pulls us apart.

this is my pledge to the american people: as your president, i will be your single greatest champion. i will fight to ensure that every american is treated equally, protected equally and honored equally.  we will reject bigotry and hatred, and oppression, in all of its ugly forms, and seek a new future built on our common culture and values as one american people. only this way will we make america great again, and safe again--for everyone. thank you very much, god bless you. thank you. thank you. thank you.  it's so great to be here tonight. i am honored to also be joined this evening by governor scott walker, chairman reince priebus, and mayor rudy giuliani.

we are at a decisive moment in this election.

last week, i laid out my plan to bring jobs back to our country. yesterday, i laid out my plan to defeat radical islamic terrorism. tonight, i am going to talk about how to make our communities safe again from crime and lawlessness.

let me begin by thanking the law enforcement officers here in this city, and across this country, for their service and sacrifice in difficult times.

the violence, riots and destruction that have taken place in milwaukee is an assault on the right of all citizens to live in security and peace.

law and order must be restored. it must be restored for the sake of all, but most especially the sake of those living in the affected communities.

the main victims of these riots are law-abiding african-american citizens living in these neighborhoods. it is their jobs, their homes, their schools and communities which will suffer as a result.

there is no compassion in tolerating lawless conduct. crime and violence is an attack on the poor, and will never be accepted in a trump administration.

the narrative that has been pushed aggressively for years now by our current administration, and pushed by my opponent hillary clinton, is a false one. the problem in our poorest communities is not that there are too many police, the problem is that there are not enough police.

more law enforcement, more community engagement, more effective policing is what our country needs.

just like hillary clinton is against the miners, she is against the police. you know it, and i know it.

those peddling the narrative of cops as a racist force in our society – a narrative supported with a nod by my opponent – share directly in the responsibility for the unrest in milwaukee, and many other places within our country.

they have fostered the dangerous anti-police atmosphere in america.

everytime we rush to judgment with false facts and narratives – whether in ferguson or in baltimore – and foment further unrest, we do a direct disservice to poor african-american residents who are hurt by the high crime in their communities.

during the last 72 hours, while protestors have raged against the police here in milwaukee, another 9 were killed in chicago and another 46 were wounded. more than 2,600 people have been shot in chicago since the beginning of the year, and almost 4,000 killed in president obama's hometown area since his presidency began.

how are we serving these american victims by attacking law enforcement officers?

the war on our police must end. it must end now.

the war on our police is a war on all peaceful citizens who want to be able to work and live and send their kids to school in safety.

our job is not to make life more comfortable for the rioter, the looter, the violent disruptor. our job is to make life more comfortable for the african-american parent who wants their kids to be able to safely walk the streets. or the senior citizen waiting for a bus. or the young child walking home from school.

for every one violent protestor, there are a hundred moms and dads and kids on that same city block who just want to be able to sleep safely at night. my opponent would rather protect the offender than the victim.

hillary clinton-backed policies are responsible for the problems in the inner cities today, and a vote for her is a vote for another generation of poverty, high crime, and lost opportunities.

i care too much about my country to let that happen.

we all care too much about our country to let that happen.

good policing saves lives. my dear friend, rudy giuliani, knows a thing or two about this. the policies put into place by rudy ultimately brought down crime by 76 percent and murder by 84 percent. think of how many families were saved, how much heartache was prevented, when police were put into communities and criminals were removed.

imagine how many lives could have been saved, all across this country, if democratic politicians hadn't blocked in their cities what rudy did in new york city? i'll make sure we deliver safe neighborhoods here in milwaukee, and all across this country.

it's easy for hillary clinton to turn a blind eye to crime when she has her own private security force. i believe all americans, not just the powerful, are entitled to security.

hillary clinton has had her chance. she failed. now it's time for new leadership.

the hillary clinton agenda hurts poor people the most.

there is no compassion in allowing drug dealers, gang members, and felons to prey on innocent people. it is the first duty of government to keep the innocent safe, and when i am president i will fight for the safety of every american – and especially those americans who have not known safety for a very, very long time.

i am asking for the vote of every african-american citizen struggling in our country today who wants a different future.

it is time for our society to address some honest and very difficult truths.

the democratic party has failed and betrayed the african-american community. democratic crime policies, education policies, and economic policies have produced only more crime, more broken homes, and more poverty.

let us look at the situation right here in milwaukee, a city run by democrats for decade after decade. last year, killings in this city increased by 69 percent, plus another 634 victims of non-fatal shootings. 18-29-year-olds accounted for nearly half of the homicide victims. the poverty rate here is nearly double the national average. almost 4 in 10 african-american men in milwaukee between the ages of 25-54 do not have a job. nearly four in 10 single mother households are living in poverty. 55 public schools in this city have been rated as failing to meet expectations, despite ten thousand dollars in funding per-pupil. there is only a 60% graduation rate, and it's one of the worst public school systems in the country.

1 in 5 manufacturing jobs has disappeared in milwaukee since we fully opened our markets to china, and many african-american neighborhoods have borne the brunt of this hit.

to every voter in milwaukee, to every voter living in every inner city, or every forgotten stretch of our society, i am running to offer you a better future.

the democratic party has taken the votes of african-americans for granted. they've just assumed they'll get your support and done nothing in return for it. it's time to give the democrats some competition for these votes, and it's time to rebuild the inner cities of america – and to reject the failed leadership of a rigged political system.

i'm not part of the corrupt system. in fact, the corrupt system is trying to stop me. i've been paying my own way. the voters in the republican party this year defied the donors, the consultants, the power brokers, and choose a nominee from outside our failed and corrupt and broken system.

the other party – the democratic party – nominated the personification of special interest corruption. the democratic party rigged the nomination to give it to hillary clinton, thus giving the soul of their party this year to the special interests.

i am running to listen to your voice, to hear your cries for help. the quiet voices in our society, not the loudest demonstrators, need to have their demands heard.

jobs. safety. opportunity. fair and equal representation.

we reject the bigotry of hillary clinton which panders to and talks down to communities of color and sees them only as votes, not as individual human beings worthy of a better future. she doesn't care at all about the hurting people of this country, or the suffering she has caused them.

the african-american community has been taken for granted for decades by the democratic party. it's time to break with the failures of the past – i want to offer americans a new future.

it is time for rule by the people, not rule by special interests.

every insider, getting rich off of our broken system, is throwing money at hillary clinton. the hedge fund managers, the wall street investors, the professional political class.

it's the powerful protecting the powerful.

insiders fighting for insiders.

i am fighting for you.

when we talk about the insider, who are we talking about? it's the comfortable politicians looking out for their own interests. it's the lobbyists who know how to insert that perfect loophole into every bill. it's the financial industry that knows how to regulate their competition out of existence. the insiders also include the media executives, anchors and journalists in washington, los angeles, and new york city, who are part of the same failed status quo and want nothing to change.

every day you pick up a newspaper, or turn on the nightly news, and you hear about some self-interest banker or some discredited washington insider says they oppose our campaign. or some encrusted old politician says they oppose our campaign. or some big time lobbyist says they oppose our campaign.

i wear their opposition as a badge of honor. because it means i am fighting for real change, not just partisan change. i am fighting – all of us across the country are fighting – for peaceful regime change in our own country. the media-donor-political complex that's bled this country dry has to be replaced with a new government of, by and for the people.

the leadership class in washington d.c., of which hillary clinton has been a member for thirty years, has abandoned the people of this country.

i am going to give the people their voice back.

think about it. the people opposing our campaign are the same people who have left our border open and let innocent people suffer as a result.

the people opposing our campaign are the same people who have led us into one disastrous foreign war after another.

the people opposing our campaign are the same people who lied to us about one trade deal after another.

aren't you tired of a system that gets rich at your expense?

aren't you tired of big media, big businesses, and big donors rigging the system to keep your voice from being heard?

are you ready for change?

are you ready for leadership that puts you, the american people, first? that puts your country first? that puts your family first?

let's talk about what this means for the inner cities of america. it's time to break through the television noise, the entrenched interests. i understand that a lot of powerful people in our political system – a lot of people who've created our problems – will lose a lot of their contracts, and their special gigs, if african-american voters, and all minority voters, support my campaign.

it's time to stop making the special interests rich. it's time to make the american people rich.

i am going to make america wealthy again.

the democratic party has run nearly every inner city in this country for 50 years, and run them into financial ruin.

they've ruined the schools.

they've driven out the jobs.

they've tolerated a level of crime no american should consider acceptable.

violent crime has risen 17% in america's 50 largest cities last year. killings of police officers this year is up nearly 50 percent. homicides are up more than 60% in baltimore. they are up more than 50% in washington, d.c.

this is the future offered by hillary clinton. more poverty, more crime, and more of the same. the future she offers is the most pessimistic thing i can possibly imagine.

it is time for a different future.

here is what i am proposing.

first, on immigration. no community in this country has been hurt worse by hillary clinton's immigration policies than the african-american community. now she is proposing to print instant work permits for millions of illegal immigrants, taking jobs directly from low-income americans. i will secure our border, protect our workers, and improve jobs and wages in your community. we will only invite people to join our country who share our tolerant values, who support our constitution, and who love all of our people.

on trade, i am going to renegotiate nafta, stand up to china, withdraw from the tpp, and protect every last american job.

on taxes, i am going to give a massive tax cut to every worker and small business in this country, bring thousands of new companies and millions of new jobs onto our shores – and make it very difficult for our businesses to leave.

i am going to reform our regulations so jobs stay in america, and new businesses come to america to hire workers right here in milwaukee. every policy my opponent has sends jobs overseas. i am going to bring trillions in new wealth back to the united states.

on education, it is time to have school choice, merit pay for teachers, and to end the tenure policies that hurt good teachers and reward bad teachers. we are going to put students and parents first.

hillary clinton would rather deny opportunities to millions of young african-american children, just so she can curry favor with the education bureaucracy.

i am going to allow charter schools to thrive, and help young kids get on the american ladder of success: a good education, and a good-paying job.

on crime, i am going to support more police in our communities, appoint the best prosecutors and judges in the country, pursue strong enforcement of federal laws, and i am going to break up the gangs, the cartels and criminal syndicates terrorizing our neighborhoods. to every lawbreaker hurting innocent people in this country, i say: your free reign will soon come crashing to an end.

on healthcare, we are going to get rid of obamacare – which has caused soaring double-digit premium increases – and give choice to patients and consumers. aetna, just today, announced they are dropping out – as are many of the major insurance companies.

on government corruption, i am going to restore honor to our government. we've seen the corruption of hillary clinton, the mass email deletions, the pay-for-play at the state department, the profiteering, the favors given to foreign corporations and governments at your expense. we've seen a former secretary of state lie to congress about her illegal email scheme, risk innocent american lives, and bring dishonor onto our government.

in my administration, i am going to enforce all laws concerning the protection of classified information. no one will be above the law.

i am going to forbid senior officials from trading favors for cash by preventing them from collecting lavish speaking fees through their spouses when they serve.

i am going to ask my senior officials to sign an agreement not to accept speaking fees from corporations with a registered lobbyist for five years after leaving office, or from any entity tied to a foreign government. this is all just the beginning.

we are going to make this a government of the people once again. this is our chance to take back power from all the people who've taken it from you. the reason you see the establishment media lining up behind my opponent is because they are scared that you, with your vote, can take away their power and return it to your family and community.

these are tough times. but i know we can make american greater than ever before.

to do this, we are going to need a fighter in the white house.

i will be your fighter.

to defeat crime and radical islamic terrorism in our country, to win trade in our country, you need tremendous physical and mental strength and stamina. hillary clinton doesn't have that strength and stamina. she cannot win for you.

most importantly, she has bad judgment. bad judgment on terrorism, bad judgement on foreign policy, bad judgment on trade.

the only individuals she's ever delivered for is her donors – not the people.

i've said it before, and i'll say it again. my opponent asks her supporters to repeat a three-word pledge. her pledge reads: "i'm with her"

i choose to recite a different pledge. my pledge reads: "i'm with you – the american people."

i will fight to ensure that every american is treated equally, protected equally, and honored equally. we will reject bigotry and hatred and oppression in all of its forms, and seek a new future of security, prosperity and opportunity – a future built on our common culture and values as one american people.

i am asking for your vote so i can be your champion in the white house. we will once again be a country of law and order, and a country of great success.

to every parent who dreams for their children, and to every child who dreams for their future, i say these words to you tonight: i'm with you, i will fight for you, and i will win for you.

together, we will make america strong again.

we will make american safe again.

and we will make america great again.

thank you, and god bless.
i'd like to take a moment to talk about the heartbreak and devastation in louisiana, a state that is very special to me.

we are one nation. when one state hurts, we all hurt – and we must all work together to lift each other up. working, building, restoring together.

our prayers are with the families who have lost loved ones, and we send them our deepest condolences. though words cannot express the sadness one feels at times like this, i hope everyone in louisiana knows that our country is praying for them and standing with them to help them in these difficult hours.

we are one country, one people, and we will have together one great future.

tonight, i'd like to talk about the new american future we are going to create together.

last week, i laid out my plan to bring jobs back to our country.

on monday, i laid out my plan to defeat radical islamic terrorism.

on tuesday, in wisconsin, i talked about how we are going to restore law and order to this country.

let me take this opportunity to extend our thanks and our gratitude to the police and law enforcement officers in this country who have sacrificed so greatly in these difficult times.

the chaos and violence on our streets, and the assaults on law enforcement, are an attack against all peaceful citizens. if i am elected president, this chaos and violence will end – and it will end very quickly.

every single citizen in our land has a right to live in safety.

to be one united nation, we must protect all of our people. but we must also provide opportunities for all of our people.

we cannot make america great again if we leave any community behind.

nearly four in ten african-american children are living in poverty.i will not rest until children of every color in this country are fully included in the american dream.

jobs, safety, opportunity. fair and equal representation. this is what i promise to african-americans, hispanic-americans, and all americans.

but to achieve this new american future we must break from the failures of the past.

as you know, i am not a politician. i have worked in business, creating jobs and rebuilding neighborhoods my entire adult life. i've never wanted to learn the language of the insiders, and i've never been politically correct – it takes far too much time, and can often make more difficult.

sometimes, in the heat of debate and speaking on a multitude of issues, you don't choose the right words or you say the wrong thing. i have done that, and i regret it, particularly where it may have caused personal pain. too much is at stake for us to be consumed with these issues.

but one thing i can promise you is this: i will always tell you the truth.

i speak the truth for all of you, and for everyone in this country who doesn't have a voice.

i speak the truth on behalf of the factory worker who lost his or her job.

i speak the truth on behalf of the veteran who has been denied the medical care they need – and so many are not making it. they are dying.

i speak the truth on behalf of the family living near the border that deserves to be safe in their own country but is instead living with no security at all.

our campaign is about representing the great majority of americans – republicans, democrats, independents, conservatives and liberals – who read the newspaper, or turn on the tv, and don't hear anyone speaking for them. all they hear are insiders fighting for insiders.

these are the forgotten men and women in our society, and they are angry at so much on so many levels. the poverty, the unemployment, the failing schools, the jobs moving to other countries.

i am fighting for these forgotten americans.

fourteen months ago, i declared my campaign for the presidency on the promise to give our government back to the people. every day since then, i've worked to repay the loyalty and the faith that you have put in me.

every day i think about how much is at stake for this country. this isn't just the fight of my life, it's the fight ofour lives – together – to save our country.

i refuse to let another generation of american children be excluded from the american dream. our whole country loses when young people of limitless potential are denied the opportunity to contribute their talents because we failed to provide them the opportunities they deserved. let our children be dreamers too.

our whole country loses every time a kid doesn't graduate from high school, or fails to enter the workforce or, worse still, is lost to the dreadful world of drugs and crime.

when i look at the failing schools, the terrible trade deals, and the infrastructure crumbling in our inner cities, i know all of this can be fixed - and it can be fixed very quickly.

in the world i come from, if something is broken, you fix it.

if something isn't working, you replace it.

if a product doesn't deliver, you make a change.

i have no patience for injustice, no tolerance for government incompetence, no sympathy for leaders who fail their citizens.

that's why i am running: to end the decades of bitter failure and to offer the american people a new future of honesty, justice and opportunity. a future where america, and its people, always – and i mean always – come first.

aren't you tired of a system that gets rich at your expense?

aren't you tired of the same old lies and the same old broken promises? and hillary clinton has proven to be one of the greatest liars of all time.

aren't you tired of arrogant leaders who look down on you, instead of serving and protecting you?

that is all about to change – and it's about to change soon. we are going to put the american people first again.

i've travelled all across this country laying out my bold and modern agenda for change.

in this journey, i will never lie to you. i will never tell you something i do not believe. i will never put anyone's interests ahead of yours.

and, i will never, ever stop fighting for you.

i have no special interest. i am spending millions of dollars on my own campaign – nobody else is.

my only interest is the american people.

so while sometimes i can be too honest, hillary clinton is the exact opposite: she never tells the truth. one lie after another, and getting worse each passing day.

the american people are still waiting for hillary clinton to apologize for all of the many lies she's told to them, and the many times she's betrayed them.

tell me, has hillary clinton ever apologized for lying about her illegal email server and deleting 33,000 emails?

has hillary clinton apologized for turning the state department into a pay-for-play operation where favors are sold to the highest bidder?

has she apologized for lying to the families who lost loved ones at benghazi?

has she apologized for putting iran on the path to nuclear weapons?

has she apologized for iraq? for libya? for syria? has she apologized for unleashing isis across the world?

has hillary clinton apologized for the decisions she made that have led to so much death, destruction and terrorism?

speaking of lies, we now know from the state department announcement that president obama lied about the $400 million dollars in cash that was flown to iran. he denied it was for the hostages, but it was. he said we don't pay ransom, but he did. he lied about the hostages – openly and blatantly – just like he lied about obamacare.

now the administration has put every american travelling overseas, including our military personnel, at greater risk of being kidnapped. hillary clinton owns president obama's iran policy, one more reason she can never be allowed to be president.

let's talk about the economy. here, in this beautiful state, so many people have suffered because of nafta. bill clinton signed the deal, and hillary clinton supported it. north carolina has lost nearly half of its manufacturing jobs since nafta went into effect.

bill clinton also put china into the world trade organization – another hillary clinton-backed deal. your city of charlotte has lost 1 in 4 manufacturing jobs since china joined the wto, and many of these jobs were lost while hillary clinton was secretary of state – our chief diplomat with china. she was a disaster, totally unfit for the job.

hillary clinton owes the state of north carolina a very big apology, and i think you'll get that apology around the same time you'll get to see her 33,000 deleted emails.

another major issue in this campaign has been the border. our open border has allowed drugs and crime and gangs to pour into our communities. so much needless suffering, so much preventable death. i've spent time with the families of wonderful americans whose loved ones were killed by the open borders and sanctuary cities that hillary clinton supports.

i've embraced the crying parents who've lost their children to violence spilling across our border. parents like laura wilkerson and michelle root and sabine durden and jamiel shaw whose children were killed by illegal immigrants.

my opponent supports sanctuary cities.

but where was the sanctuary for kate steinle? where was the sanctuary for the children of laura, michelle, sabine and jamiel?

where was the sanctuary for every other parent who has suffered so horribly?

these moms and dads don't get a lot of consideration from our politicians. they certainly don't get apologies. they'll never even get the time of day from hillary clinton.

but they will always come first to me.

listen closely: we will deliver justice for all of these american families. we will create a system of immigration that makes us all proud.

hillary clinton's mistakes destroy innocent lives, sacrifice national security, and betray the working families of this country.

please remember this: i will never put personal profit before national security. i will never leave our border open to appease donors and special interests. i will never support a trade deal that kills american jobs. i will never put the special interests before the national interest. i will never put a donor before a voter, or a lobbyist before a citizen.

instead, i will be a champion for the people.

the establishment media doesn't cover what really matters in this country, or what's really going on in people's lives. they will take words of mine out of context and spend a week obsessing over every single syllable, and then pretend to discover some hidden meaning in what i said.

just imagine for a second if the media spent this energy holding the politicians accountable who got innocent americans like kate steinle killed – she was gunned down by an illegal immigrant who had been deported five times.

just imagine if the media spent this much time investigating the poverty and joblessness in our inner cities.

just think about how much different things would be if the media in this country sent their cameras to our border, or to our closing factories, or to our failing schools. or if the media focused on what dark secrets must be hidden in the 33,000 emails hillary clinton deleted.

instead, every story is told from the perspective of the insiders. it's the narrative of the people who rigged the system, never the voice of the people it's been rigged against.

so many people suffering in silence. no cameras, no coverage, no outrage from a media class that seems to get outraged over just about everything else.

so again, it's not about me. it's never been about me. it's about all the people in this country who don't have a voice.

i am running to be their voice.

i am running to be the voice for every forgotten part of this country that has been waiting and hoping for a better future.

i am glad that i make the powerful a little uncomfortable now and again – including some powerful people in my own party. because it means i am fighting for real change.

there's a reason the hedge fund managers, the financial lobbyists, the wall street investors, are throwing their money at hillary clinton. because they know she will make sure the system stays rigged in their favor.

it's the powerful protecting the powerful.

the insiders fighting for the insiders.

i am fighting for you.

here is the change i propose.

on terrorism, we are going to end the era of nation-building and instead focus on destroying isis and radical islamic terrorism.

we will use military, cyber and financial warfare and work with any partner in the world, and the middle east, that shares our goal of defeating terrorism. i have a message for the terrorists trying to kill our citizens: we will find you, we will destroy you, and we will win.

on immigration, we will temporarily suspend immigration from any place where adequate screening cannot be performed. all applicants for immigration will be vetted for ties to radical ideology, and we will screen out anyone who doesn't share our values and love our people. anyone who believes sharia law supplants american law will not be given an immigrant visa. if you want to join our society, then you must embrace our society, our values and our tolerant way of life. those who believe in oppressing women, gays, hispanics, african-americans and people of different faiths are not welcome to join our country.

we will promote our america values, our american way of life, and our american system of government which are all the best in the world.

my opponent on the other hand wants a 550% increase in syrian refugees. her plan would bring in roughly 620,000 refugees from all refugee-sending nations in her first term, on top of all other immigration. hillary clinton is running to be america's angela merkel, and we've seen how much crime and how many problems that's caused the german people.

we have enough problems already, we don't need another one.

on crime, we are going to add more police, more investigators, and appoint the best judges and prosecutors in the world. we will pursue strong enforcement of federal laws.

the gangs and cartels and criminal syndicates terrorizing our people will be stripped apart one by one. their day is over.

on trade, we are going to renegotiate nafta, withdraw from the tpp, stand up to china on our terrible trade agreement, and protect every last american job.

hillary clinton has supported all of the major trade deals that have stripped this country of its jobs and its wealth.

on taxes, we are going to massively cut tax rates for workers and small businesses – creating millions of new good paying jobs.

we are going to get rid of regulations that send jobs overseas and we are going to make it easier for young americans to get the credit they need to start a small business and pursue their dreams.

on education, we are going to give students choice, and allow charter schools to thrive. we are going to end tenure policies that reward bad teachers and hurt good ones. my opponent wants to deny students choice and opportunity, all to get a little bit more money from the education bureaucracy. she doesn't care how many young dreams are dashed in the process.

we are going to work closely with african-american parents and students in the inner cities – and what a big difference that will make. this means a lot to me, and it is going to be a top priority in a trump administration.

on healthcare, we are going to repeal and replace obamacare. countless americans have been forced into part-time jobs, premiums are about to jump by double-digits yet again, and just this week aetna announced it is pulling out of the exchanges in north carolina. we are going to replace this disaster with reforms that give you choice and freedom and control in healthcare – at a much lower cost.

on political corruption, we are going to restore honor to our government.

in my administration, i am going to enforce all laws concerning the protection of classified information. no one will be above the law.

i am going to forbid senior officials from trading favors for cash by preventing them from collecting lavish speaking fees through their spouses when they serve.

i am going to ask my senior officials to sign an agreement not to accept speaking fees from corporations with a registered lobbyist for five years after leaving office, or from any entity tied to a foreign government.

finally, we are going to bring this country together. we are going to do it by emphasizing what we all have in common as americans. we are going to reject the bigotry of hillary clinton, which sees communities of color only as votes and not as human beings worthy of a better future.

if african-american voters give  a chance by giving me their vote, the result for them will be amazing. look at how badly things are going under decades of democratic leadership – look at the schools, look at the 58% of young african-americans not working. it is time for change.

what do you have to lose by trying something new? – i will fix it. this means so much to me, and i will work as hard as i can to bring new opportunity to places in our country which have not known opportunity in a very long time.

hillary clinton and the democratic party have taken african-american votes totally for granted. because the votes have been automatically there, there has been no reason for democrats to produce.

it is time to break with the failures of the past, and to fight for every last american child in this country to have the better future they deserve.

in my administration, every american will be treated equally, protected equally, and honored equally. we will reject bigotry and hatred and oppression in all of its forms, and seek a new future built on our common culture and values as one american people.

this is the change i am promising all of you: an honest government, a fair economy, and a just society for each and every american.

but we can never fix our problems by relying on the same politicians who created these problems in the first place.

72% of voters say our country is on the wrong track. i am the change candidate, hillary clinton is the failed status quo.

it is time to vote for a new american future.

together, we will make america strong again.

we will make american proud again.

we will make america safe again.

friends and fellow citizens: come november, we will make america great again.

thank you, and god bless.
thank you very much. thank you. thank you. what a crowd. wow, look at that. boy. what a crowd.

thank you. thank you very much. thank you. we just set a record in this building, folks, so that's good news. that's fantastic. thank you.

i love michigan, and i must tell you, come november, to be specific, november 8th, with your help, we are going to win and we are going to win big.

and we are going to the white house and we are going to bring jobs back to our country and we are going to bring jobs back to michigan.

it's going to be a victory for the people, a victory for the wage-earner, the factory worker. remember this, a big, big victory for the factory worker. they haven't had those victories for a long time. a victory for every citizen and for all of the people whose voices have not been heard for many, many years. they're going to be heard again.

it'll be a win for the voters, not for the pundits, not for the journalists, not for the lobbyists, not for the global special interests funding my opponent's campaign.

it's going to be your victory.

these are hard times for many in this country. i just got back from a tour of the suffering and devastation in louisiana. perhaps you can tell by the way i'm dressed. just got off the plane. it was actually incredible. the spirit of the people is incredible. the devastation, likewise, they've never seen anything like it, but the spirit of the people is incredible. and honestly, obama ought to get off the golf course and get down there.

we mourn for the lives lost and we pledge our help, comfort and support to every last person in need. to the people of louisiana, we are with you and we will always be with you.

in my vision, i saw not only the suffering of our people but also their strength, courage and really unbeatable spirit. their spirit will overcome. we have a lot to overcome in our country, especially the fact that our jobs are being taken away from us and going to other lands, and we're not going to allow it to happen, and especially it's happening right here in michigan.

it's an amazing spirit that we will need to rebuild our country. it's that strength that we're going to need to create the new american future our children so much deserve.

in this new -- thank you. thank you very much. in this new future, millions of workers on the sidelines will be returned to the work force. and if i'm not elected president, that will never happen, believe me. they're talking to you, they're playing you, but believe me, you know the answer.

and i have to say that i've been talking about michigan and the car industry and how your businesses and plants have been ripped out of your land, and i have been doing it for four years to the people of michigan. other people started talking about it last week. they're not going to do anything about it.

crumbling roads, bridges and airports will be replaced with the infrastructure our country needs and deserves.

families strapped in welfare will be provided with jobs and opportunity. children stuck in failing government schools will be able to attend the school of their choice.

government will become lean, effective, responsible and honest.

our border will be protected and our children will be safe, very, very safe.

and we will build the wall, don't worry about it. we will build the wall.

law and order will be restored and the poorest places in our country will know safety and peace again.

american values and cultures will be cherished - and i mean cherished and celebrated once again. but to achieve this new american future, we must break free from the bitter failures of the past, and reject the same insiders telling us the same old lies over and over, and over again.

no group in america has been more harmed by hillary clinton's policies than african-americans no group. no group. if hillary clinton's goal was to inflict pain on the african-american community, she could not have done a better job. it is a disgrace.

tonight i'm asking for the vote of every single african-american citizen in this country who wants to see a better future.

the inner cities of our country have been run by the democratic party for more than 50 years. their policies have produced only poverty, joblessness, failing schools, and broken homes. it's time to hold democratic politicians accountable for what they have done to these communities. at what point do we say enough?

at what point do we say enough?

it is time to hold failed leaders accountable for their results, not just their empty words over and over again. look at what the democratic party has done to the city as an example and there are many others, of detroit. 40 percent of detroit's residents, 40 percent, live in poverty. half of all detroit residents do not work, and cannot work, and can't get a job

detroit tops the list of most dangerous cities in terms of violent crime, number one. this is the legacy of the democratic politicians who have run this city. this is the result of the policy agenda embraced by crooked hillary clinton.

33,000 e-mails gone.

the only way to change results is to change leadership.

we can never fix our problems by relying on the same politicians who created our problems in the first place. a new future requires brand new leadership.

look at how much african-american communities are suffering from democratic control. to those i say the following, what do you have to lose by trying something new like trump? what do you have to lose?

i say it again, what do you have to lose? look, you're living in poverty. your schools are no good. you have no jobs. 58% of your youth is unemployed. what the hell do you have to lose?

and at the end of four years, i guarantee you that i will get over 95% of the african american vote. i promise you. because i will produce, i will produce for the inner cities and i will produce for the african americans. and the democrats will not produce and all they have done is taken advantage of your vote. that's all they've done. and once the election is over, they go back to their palaces in washington. and you know what? they do nothing for you. just remember it.

so, you have nothing to lose. one thing we know for sure: if you keep voting for the same people you will keep getting the same, exactly the same, results.

my administration will go to work for you as no one has ever done before.

we will work. we will bring back jobs. we will work.

by contrast, the one thing every item in hillary clinton's agenda has in common is that it takes jobs and opportunities away from african american workers.

it takes jobs away from all workers because your companies are leaving michigan. your companies are leaving every single state in our union. they're going to mexico. they're going everywhere but here.

hillary clinton supports open borders. which means many things but it means people pouring and they take your jobs.

whether you like it or don't like it. they take your jobs.

her fierce opposition to school choice. you need choice. you have to get your children into good schools. you do that through competition. you need choice.

her plan to massively raise taxes on small business and everyone. $1.3 trillion tax increase. where as i am cutting taxes very substantively for business and for the middle class.

her tremendous opposition to american energy. her opposition is fierce and her record of giving our jobs away to many many other countries. america must reject the bigot dream of hillary clinton who sees communities of color only as votes, not as human beings worthy of a better future.

hillary clinton would rather provide a job to a refugee from overseas that to give that job to unemployed african american youth in cities like detroit, who have become refugees in their own country.

it's time to get our country back to work and that includes an all out effort. to help young african americans get the good paying jobs that they deserve.

hillary clinton's plan would bring in an estimated 620,000 refugees in her first term at a lifetime benefit cost of some $400 billion to our country. according to the senate immigration subcommittee.

hillary clinton wants to be america's angela merkel. by the way, for the price of supporting one refugee in the united states, we could support 12 in a safe zone in the middle east or let's say syria.

the approved refugee screening standards that i have proposed will save countless, billions of dollars. it's called extreme vetting. extreme vetting.

we will invest a portion of the money saved in the jobs program for inner city youth. the african american community has given so much to this country. they fought and died in every war since the revolution.

they've lifted up the conscience of our nation in the long march towards civil rights. they've sacrificed so much for the national good. yet, nearly 4 in 10 african americans children still live in poverty and 58%, as i said, of african americans are not working.

they cannot find a job.

we must do better as a country. i refuse to believe that the future must be like the past. it won't be. our future will be a great future for everyone. for everyone.

in a trump administration, all workers of all colors will get priorities for jobs in their own country which is about time.

i want higher wages for african americans, for hispanic americans, and for all americans. we want higher wages

many, many workers in our country are making substantially less money today in real wages than they made 18 years ago.

they're working two jobs instead of one. they're working much harder as they get older and it's supposed to be the opposite.

we're gonna stop it. we're going to create great jobs and we're gonna get the wages up.

hillary clinton, is a throwback to an ugly past where politicians preyed on our poorest citizens while selling them out for personal gain. promises, promises, all talk no action. all talk, no action politicians.

they talk, talk, talk. you vote them in with great fan fare and then they just do nothing.

with trump, that is not going to happen. believe me.

we must turn the page on yesterday, only a change in leadership will produce a change in outcomes. and we can't take, as a country, four more years of obama. and that's what you get with hillary clinton but probably worse.

in this new american future, american workers will always come first. america first, always come first.

this will include a complete revitalization of the michigan manufacturing sector. now, you have to understand, the michigan manufacturing sector is a disaster. is a disaster.

look at your notes, look at your stats, look at what's happening to your state. you're losing your businesses. it's like taking candy away from a baby. and many people right now in this audience that think you have jobs, you're gonna find out very soon that your company is leaving from mexico or some other place and you're not going to have your job for very long.

and if trump gets in, those days are over folks, they're over

we will be brining back our jobs to michigan. there will be a very big price to pay for those companies that wanna leave our land, go someplace else, manufacture their goods, and sell back with no retribution.

it won't happen. there will be consequence. won't happen. it will not happen.

michigan lost more than 1 in 4 of its manufacturing jobs since nafta.

as you know, nafta, one of the worst trade bills in history maybe, maybe the worst trade bill signed in the history of the world. not only in our country. its emptied out michigan, its emptied out new england. its emptied out new york state. its emptied out so many of our great companies.

they leave and they fire. we end up with devastation. we end up with unemployment. we end up with nothing.

the bill was signed by bill clinton.

it was supported by hillary clinton.

right here in this community, you have lost 1 in 7 manufacturing jobs since bill clinton put china into the world trade organization. another hillary clinton back deal. she backs all the deals.

and by the way, she will be backing trans pacific partnership. tpp. if she is elected. just mark your words. just remember, you know it's gonna happen.

she considered it the gold standard. all of a sudden when she heard me talking about it, she said "i can't win this one" so she went against it. she will go back immediately, and you saw that when the governor of virginia, who's her friend, said that was going to happen.

detroit lost more than 1 in 3 manufacturing jobs following the nafta and wto agreements. that was supported very strongly by my opponent.

no industry, has been hurt more by hillary clinton's policies than the automobile industry or as we call it the car industry. it has been a total disaster.

according to the bureau of the labor of statistics, before nafta went into effect, there were 285,000 auto workers in michigan. today, that number is down to only 160,000 and it is going to be a lot lower because if you look at the massive plants being built right now in mexico, car plants, folks, you can kiss these jobs goodbye.

but not me. not with me. it won't happen.

in 2014, general motors announced plans to double its investments in mexico by plans by 2018. not good.

in april 2016, ford motor company announced plans to invest another $1.6 billion constructing an auto plant in mexico. mexico will become the car capital of the world very, very quickly. and michigan is going to end up with lots of empty buildings all over the place unless you elect  president. in which case, it's not gonna happen.

in same month, fiat chrysler announced 1,300 layoffs. the list goes on and on. we will turn it around, we will turn it around fast. we will meet with these companies and we will say, it will not be easy for you to move your plant to mexico for you sell your cars through what will be a very strong border, and for you not to pay tax on those cars coming in, okay?

and when we tell them that there will be a substantial tax on the cars that they make in mexico and other places, number one, they're not going to move in the first place, and number two, if they do, our country will make one heck of a lot of money.

but to save your jobs and do all of the things that i'm talking about, we have to win on november 8th.

the destruction that nafta started will be finished off if the transpacific partnership is approved. it will be almost, nothing is as bad as nafta, but it will be almost as bad as nafta.

we know from hillary's closest friend, that she is planning to ram through tpp if she's elected. she even called it, as i said, the gold standard. its passage would be a disaster for michigan, in particular, for the car industry in particular, for the people of michigan. i won't let it happen.

according to the economic policy institute, the united states trade deficit with the proposed tpp member countries cost over one million manufacturing jobs in our country in 2015. by far the biggest losses occurred in motor vehicles and parks, which lost nearly 740,000 think of that 740,000 manufacturing jobs. michigan ranks first for jobs lost as a share of state workforce due to trade deficit with tpp members.

just imagine how many more automobile jobs will be lost if hillary gets her wish and approves tpp. it will not be pretty. that's why i have announced that we will withdrawal from the deal before that deal can ever, ever, ever happen.

i have have previously laid out a detailed seven-point plan for trade reform, available on my website. it includes strong protections against currency manipulation from countries like china and tariffs against any nation that cheats by unfairly subsidizing their goods, of which many of them do.

my plan also includes a total renegotiation of nafta so our jobs can come back.

and if we can't make a much, much better deal than we have right now, we will walk.

i'm not in any way, shape or form an isolationist. i don't believe in it, but we have to make great deals for our country. we're losing in our whole trade negotiation with all countries over $800 billion a year. that's our trade deficit. who negotiates these deals? we want great trade deals and we will have them.

but we want trade deals that work for america, that create jobs and wealth for our country, that work for the american worker.

we want to shrink our almost $800 billion trade deficit. we don't want to expand it, and it's been expanding for years. for years and years. you look at the charts up, up, up, up, up. and i say to myself so often, why don't they do something about it? and the reason is we have political hacks as our negotiators.

we have politicians as our negotiators. we have politicians that are controlled like hillary clinton by her donors, her special interests and her lobbyists and they won't let her do what's right for our workers and for our country.

we want to be leading the world in production, exports and manufacturing. we want jobs to leave from other countries and come into our country for a change.

another major issue in this race is foreign policy. hillary clinton has made one bad foreign policy decision after another. beginning with the support for going to war in iraq, and i opposed it so strongly.

nobody cared. i was a civilian, but i opposed it. i said you will have a total destabilization of the middle east. it was such common sense and look what happened. her tenure as secretary of state may be regarded as the most disastrous in united states history. but she is totally without remorse. her failed decisions as secretary of state unleashed isis onto the world.

but has she ever apologized for the death and destruction she has caused? no.

look at the world before and after she became secretary of state. pre-hillary in the early 2009s, iraq was seeing a reduction in violence. libya was somewhat stable. syria was under control. the group we now know today, isis, was close to being extinguished. iran was being choked by sanctions.

now, take a look at what we have. fast forward to the present time.

after hillary, here is what it looks like. iraq is in total chaos. syria is in the midst of a disastrous civil war. a refugee crisis now threatens europe and the united states, where we're taking in thousands and thousands and thousands of people. isis has been unleashed unto the entire world.

iran, the world's top state sponsor of terrorism has been put on the path to nuclear weapons, was given $400 million in ransom payment cash

very much like you can keep your doctor, you can keep your plan, obamacare a total disaster. it will be repealed. it will be replaced.

hillary clinton is a legacy of death, destruction, and terrorism. america deserves a better legacy.

all of you deserve a much, much, better future.

i am the change agent. i am the change agent.

i am your messenger. and i said it many times, i'm nothing more than your messenger. it's a message of strong defense, common sense, take care of our vets, great education, get rid of common core, great health care, get rid of obamacare, save our second amendment.

which is under tremendous siege right now.

hillary clinton is the defender of the status quo or what we have. while our country lost badly under hillary clinton, she cashed in big time. our country was losing. our people were losing, but she is cashing in.

bill clinton's speaking fees surged while hillary was secretary of state. he was paid almost $50 million for speeches during her tenure, an increase in 44 percent over the previous four years.

by the way, things came out today that blow everything away today. then there was all of the money funneled into the clinton foundation from foreign governments and corporations. it was pay for play.

yet, hillary clinton, who is indifferent to the suffering she has caused, has no remorse at all. she offers no apologies. no apologies for unleashing isis. no apologies for her open borders. no apologies for lying about her e-mails or about benghazi.

the only way to learn the full depth of her public corruption is to read the 33,000 e-mails that she deleted.

and the only way to get justice in this rigged system is to show up and vote on november 8th and vote big, big, big.

and i will bring your jobs back. so are you ready to vote?

and what about your future? is it going to be great, good, or terrible?

great. so if you're ready to vote for honest government and the honest government that you deserve, a trump administration will end the corruption and restore integrity to government service. remember, i'm funding my campaign, i'm spending tremendous amounts of money on running for office.

i'm raising money for the republican party and the republican national committee, which i think is doing a very good job, but i'll tell you more about that on november 8th. i'll let you know if they do a good job or if they do not such a good job. but i think they're going to do a great job.

no one will be above the law in a trump administration. the state department will work for the country, not for hillary clinton's donors.

and i will work for you and i will work for no one else. i will work for you. i will never lie to you. i will never put any other interests before you and i will never, ever stop fighting for you. never.

the government will work for the people again. that means we are only going to admit individuals into our country who support our values and we're not going to issue visas where adequate screening controls take place. we are going to make sure that we have total screening, and without it, we cannot continue to have our government run like this. we will also seek to join in partnership with any nation that wishes to join us in defeating and destroying isis.

at home, taxes will go down, especially for look, i mean, it's going to go down for a lot of people, for business they're going down, businesses are going to flourish, they're going to come pouring back. but taxes will go down, especially for middle-income americans.

and small business rates will be lowered to 15 percent so we can put millions of new jobs into our poorest neighborhoods.

as i said, obamacare will be repealed and replaced. voters, not special interests, will be in charge finally. we are going to bring our country together again. we have a divided country. it's totally divided. the era of division will be replaced with a future of unity, total unity. we will love each other. we will have one county. everybody will work together.

we are going to do it by emphasizing what we all have in common as americans. it's time to break with the failures of the past and to fight for every last child in this country to have the better future they deserve.

in my administration, every american will be treated equally, protected equally and honored equally. we will reject bigotry and hatred and oppression in all of its forms and seek a new future built on our common culture and values as one american people.

this is the change i am promising to all of you; an honest government with low taxes, a thriving economy and a just society for each and every american. it's time to vote for a new american future.

together, we will make america wealthy again, we will make america united again, we will make america proud again, we will make america safe again and we will make america great again. god bless you.

thank you. thank you very much, michigan. thank you. on november 8th, we are going to declare our independence from special interests, corrupt politicians, and from a rigged system that benefits only the insiders.

we are going to declare our independence from media executives that don't care about us, and politicians who don't listen to us.

we are going to declare our independence from rising crime, soaring poverty and crushing debt.

we are going to declare our independence from failures of the past and create a new american future.

once again, we will have a government of, by, and for the people.

americanism, not globalism, will be our credo.

it's going to be america first from now on.

let me tell you what this new future looks like.

we are going to cut taxes and create millions of new jobs.

we are going to repeal and replace obamacare.

we are going to appoint judges who will support, defend and uphold the constitution of the united states.

we are going to save and cherish the 2nd amendment.

we will ensure every veteran in this country has the right to seek medical treatment at a va facility, or with the private doctor of their choice.

we're going to eliminate job-killing regulations.

we are going to unleash an american energy revolution.

let's talk about another issue that is important to our future, and the future of our children.

that's the issue of crime. violent crime is rising across the country. more than 2,700 have been shot in chicago alone this year.

no american should consider this level of crime acceptable. every american has the right to live in safety and peace.

a trump administration is going to restore law and order.

let me take this opportunity to thank our wonderful police and law enforcement officers. this state has known unbelievable heartache in recent days after the murder of 5 police officers, and the wounding of another 7, in the assault on dallas. we pray for the families, and hope for the speedy recovery of the wounded.

to all law enforcement in america: we are with you, we support you, and we will always stand with you.

together, we will create a safe community for every citizen in the land – but especially those who have not known safety in a very, very long time.

that includes appointing an attorney general and a secretary of homeland security who are completely committed to upholding the law.

i will appoint federal officials and investigators who will work hand-in-hand with police and citizens to dismantle gangs, cartels and criminal syndicates terrorizing our people.

i will appoint prosecutors who will go into the most dangerous communities in america and work to liberate our citizens from violence and fear.

all citizens deserve to be protected. no american left behind.

i want every african-american parent in this country – and all parents in this country – to be able to raise their kids in safety.

and i want to ensure every african-american child in this country – and all children in this country – are put on the american ladder of success: a good education, and a good-paying job.

we are going to have school choice, charter schools, and merit-pay for teachers. my opponent, hillary clinton, discriminates against african-american students by opposing school choice because she is owned and paid for by the education bureaucracy.

no one owns me. i answer only to the american people.

in a new york post column, deroy murdock, published data confirming what i've been saying about the devastating economic conditions in the african-american communities. murdock confirms these facts:

"the overall labor force participation rate for black americans has slipped from 63.2 percent to 61.2 percent — down 3.2 percent.

this metric also slumped for black teenagers, from 29.6 percent to 27.7 percent — down 6.4 percent.

the percentage of black americans in poverty has grown under obama, the census bureau reports, from 25.8 percent in 2009 to 26.2 percent in 2014 — up 1.6 percent.

the number of blacks on food stamps soared under obama — from 7.4 million in 2009 to 11.7 million in 2014 — up 58.2 percent.

also, from obama's arrival through last june 30, the percentage of black americans who own homes plunged from 46.1 to 41.7 percent, the census reports — down 9.5 percent."

nearly 4 in 10 african american children live in poverty. 58 percent of young african americans are not employed.

homicide is up nearly 50 percent in washington d.c. and up more than 60 percent in baltimore. violent crime rose 17 percent in the fifty largest us cities.

this is the legacy of president obama and hillary clinton.

to those suffering i say: what do you have to lose by trying something new?

let me also tell you what you have to gain: more jobs, higher wages, and a massive reduction in the terrible crime plaguing our inner cities.

we are going to turn it all around. success must be created for everyone, and available to everyone.

that is how we are going to create a new american future.

but to make every american safe and prosperous, we must address one of the most vital issues of all: border security.

we are going to build a wall.

we are going to enforce the law.

we are going to protect your jobs and wages.

and we are going to keep our country safe.

according to the texas government, nearly two hundred thousand illegal immigrants were booked into texas jails between 2011 and 2016. collectively, those arrested were responsible for more than half a million criminal offenses, including 1,055 homicides, 5,516 sexual assault charges and more than 50,000 charges of either burglary or theft.

yet, hillary clinton wants a totally, completely open border.

she wants catch-and-release.

obamacare for illegal immigrants.

massive amnesty in her first 100 days.

she wants to gut immigration enforcement.

she supports sanctuary cities.

she wants to let people overstay their visas without removal.

one lawless order after another.

we must not let it happen.

hillary clinton also wants a 550% increase in syrian refugees. there have been hundreds of immigrants and their children charged with terrorism inside the united states since 9/11, and a number of terrible attacks like the boston bombing, san bernardino and orlando. yet hillary clinton wants to fling open the floodgates even wider.

i want to create safe zones in the middle east. my plan suspends visas when we can't perform effective screening, and it puts forward a new ideological screening program to keep out people from our country who don't support our values. after all, that is what taking the oath of citizenship is all about.

this election will decide whether or not we have a border.

this election will decide whether or not we have a country.

today i met with the moms of american children killed by illegal immigrants as a result of the policies hillary clinton supports. hillary clinton will never meet with these families, she will never hear these stories.

these are all forgotten americans – they are not hollywood or media stars, or big money special interest donors.

she is bought-and-paid-for by the special interests.

this corruption relates closely to another corruption scandal that strikes at the heart of our democracy. every day more and more alarming facts come out.

the scandal i speak of is the state department's pay-for-play scandal under hillary clinton.

if our secretary of state can be bought, or bribed, or sell or trade government favors, then the whole american system is threatened.

it is a threat to the foundation of democracy itself. this is what happens in a third world country – it's the failed conditions people flee when they come to america.

america can never elect a candidate who, like hillary clinton, did government favors for those giving her family and her foundation massive amounts of cash.

the new revelations about hillary clinton's email scandal make clear we have only seen the tip of the iceberg.

hillary clinton is desperate to cover-up her crimes. that's why she deleted 33,000 emails. that's also why she lied repeatedly to congress and the american public.

she said she never sent or received classified materials.

that was a lie, proved over and over again.

she claimed she used an insecure email server for the convenience of using only one device. but she used multiple devices.

another lie.

under penalty of perjury, she said she turned over all of her work-related emails. but the fbi found thousands she never turned over, and now just found another 15,000 more.

another clinton lie.

she said she sent nothing marked classified.

a total lie, unmasked to the world. and more to come.

she said her server was secure, and had no breaches. but we know now it was completely unsecure, and the fbi director said it could easily be hacked by our foreign enemies.

more clinton lies.

clinton said her lawyers reviewed all of her emails before destroying them.

one more hillary clinton lie.

lie after lie after lie.

hillary clinton is unfit to hold public office.

it is impossible to figure out where the clinton foundation ends and the state department begins. it is now abundantly clear that the clintons' set up a business to profit from public office. they sold access and specific actions by and to them for money.

it goes back to the arkansas days, and it continued during the white house days with the sale of the lincoln bedroom to large donors.

but once bill was out of office the small time clinton business – or, more accurately, their crime enterprise – grew with the roles reversed. bill, now an ex-president collected the money for the clinton foundation and hillary clinton had the public offices to sell; senator, secretary of state and for all that time a potential president. they turned this into an exponentially larger business.

but it was more than a business, it was a continuing big time criminal enterprise. it involved numerous violations of the conflict of interest and bribery laws and other serious laws of the united states.

the e-mails and phone logs show that the clinton foundation and the clinton department of state were one and the same. if you donated to the clinton foundation or paid massive speaking fees to bill clinton, you got an entry to the department of state. together they constituted the most scandalous and certainly most profitable sale of public office since the teapot dome scandal of the 1920s.

today a phone log was released for cheryl mills. she was secretary of state clinton's chief of staff. you would expect the log to contain only calls concerning department of state business. but cheryl mills received 148 messages between 2010 and 2012 from the chief operating officer of the clinton foundation – no other individual or group appears to have left that many messages.

we also just learned today that more than half the people who met with hillary clinton from outside government while she was secretary of state were donors to the foundation.

this creates the nexus which is at the core of a rico case. in other words, they merged the two into the clinton family racketeering enterprise.

the specific crimes committed to carry out that enterprise are too numerous to cover in this speech. i walked through two of them yesterday – the sale of u.s. uranium to russia, and the exemption of a telecom giant from sanctions after they paid bill clinton for a speech.

the ubs saga is another one. shortly after hillary clinton became secretary of state she went to geneva and intervened in a dispute concerning secret identities of americans.

she negotiated a very good deal for ubs and a very bad deal for law enforcement. of the 52,000 accounts the u.s. was seeking, the government settled for only 4,450 accounts. her intervention was described by treasury as unusual.

before her unusual intervention ubs had donated only $60,000 to the foundation. after the clinton favor for ubs, it opened its wallet for big bucks and out came a $600,000 contribution, a $32 million loan and a $1.5 million speaking fee for bill clinton.

this is corruption, pure and simple.

this is why i have called for a special prosecutor.

justice is supposed to be blind. it's never supposed to be for sale.

in the long-run, there is only one way to end the corruption in our country: elect donald j. trump.

hillary clinton thinks she is above the law. come november, the american people will show her that she is not.

you will be voting for justice, fairness and equality.

you will also be voting for a more inclusive country, where no one is left out.

another 2 million latinos have joined the ranks of those in poverty. incomes for latino households have declined by nearly $1,000 under president obama. the number of latino children living in poverty increased by 15 percent.

our pro-growth, pro-jobs, pro-family agenda is going to bring hope back to every community in our nation. i will dedicate myself to restore the ladder of success to all those who live in poverty.

we reject the bigotry of hillary clinton, who sees communities of color only as votes, not as human beings worthy of a better future.

the era of division is coming to end. we will create a new future of american unity.

are you ready for real american change?

it is time to emphasize what we all have in common as americans.

we will promote our common culture, values and principles.

we will be one nation.

we will be one people.

we will share together one great future.

it's going to be america first.

together, we will make america proud again.

we will make america prosperous again.

we will make america safe again.

friends, citizens and fellow americans: we will make america great again.

thank you, everybody. thank you. thank you very much.

senator, governor and rudy, thank you very much.

wow, what a group! what a group!

very excited, very, very excited to be with you tonight. thank you very much.

the people of jackson and the state of mississippi have such incredible energy, that very powerful word "energy," unbelievable, incredible energy and spirit, folks. thank you very much.

and thank you for all the support you've given me right from the beginning. i will not forget it, mississippi. we love mississippi right from the beginning, right from the beginning.

this is the spirit we need to rebuild our country a hundred percent.

and this is our chance to break free from the bitter failures of the past and to create a new american future.

to everyone watching across our nation right now, to everyone who has been let down by our terrible, terrible politicians, i am asking for your vote on november 8th.

this is your chance to remove the special interests from their throne of power and to once again have a government of, by and for the people.

no one will be left behind anymore.

i'd like to take this moment to send our thoughts and prayers to everyone at the american university in kabul, afghanistan. they are going through a lot.

we must defeat radical islamic terrorism!

anyone who will not name our enemy is not fit to lead our country.

eight years of obama/clinton policies have sacrificed our safety and undermined our freedom and independence. our jobs have moved to other countries. islamic terrorism has spread within our shores. and an open border has crushed low-income workers and threatened, and i mean totally threatened, our security.

the issues we face here in america are similar to the issues faced in britain during their referendum on membership in the european union. this is the movement known as brexit.

on june 23rd, the people of britain voted to declare their independence, which is what we're looking to do also, folks

from their international government which hasn't worked. they voted to break away from rule by large corporations and media executives who believe in a world without borders.

they voted to reclaim control over immigration, over their economy, over their government.

working people and the great people of the u.k. took control of their destiny.

the people profiting from the rigged system, and it is rigged, we're finding it out every single day, the multinational banks, the media celebrities, the big donors tried to scare the british people out of voting for change. the same thing is happening right here in the united states. it's happening.

all the people benefiting from our rigged system don't want things to change. they want you to believe things can't be changed.

and they can so easily, so easily and so smartly.

and we all know things have to change. we have no choice. and they have to change right now.

before the vote, i said that britain would leave the eu, sometimes referred to as european union, and i said it and i took a lot of heat when i said it. people said, what does he know, what does he know? and guess what? i was very supportive of their right to do it and to take control of their own future, like exactly what we're going to be voting for on november 8th.

hillary clinton, who has been on the wrong side of history in every major decision, she's only made bad decisions, she's got bad judgment, she doesn't know what she's doing, folks.

she got this one wrong, too.

she got this one wrong, too, folks. she got this one wrong, too. she gets them all wrong. she gets them all wrong, doesn't she? she really got the e-mails wrong, that i can tell you.

and now hillary wants to surrender america to globalism, just what we don't want.

she wants a country without borders. she wants trade deals written for the benefit of foreign corporations. she wants a government that ignores the will of the people.

she wants to sell out american security to the clinton foundation for a big, fat pile of cash.

it's hard to tell where the clinton foundation ends and where the state department begins.

according to the associated press, more than half the meetings she took as secretary of state with people outside government were with foundation donors.

hillary clinton does not believe in america first. we believe in america first.

hillary believes in donors first and special interests and lobbyists. she will never straighten out our country. she doesn't have the strength, the stamina or the ability to straighten out our country. we'll have four more years of obama and that's just what we don't want.

she would rather give a job to a refugee from overseas than an unemployed american veteran or to an unemployed african american or hispanic.

the job of a public official is to serve and protect the citizens of the united states

not illegal immigrants, not foreign nationals seeking entry, but the people living here lawfully today, including millions of african-american and hispanic citizens, millions, millions being treated very, very unfairly, i can tell you that.

my focus will always be on the well-being of more than 300 million american citizens who call this country home and who love their country.

i will fight for their security. i will fight for their jobs. we will not let jobs be taken out of our country, be ripped out of our country and moved to mexico and many other countries. we will not let it happen anymore.

we'll be fighting for their jobs and we'll be fighting for your families, that i can tell you. it ends. what's been going on ends on november 8th.

we will have one american nation, not divided, we will be together. hillary clinton has betrayed her duty to the people. november 8th is our chance to re-declare american independence.

this is a great honor for me. i am going right now to invite onto the stage the man behind brexit and a man who led brilliantly the united kingdom independence party in this fight and won despite all odds, despite horrible name-calling, despite so many obstacles.

ladies and gentlemen, mr. nigel farage.

nigel farage: "well, thank you very much

good evening mississippi.

i come to you from the united kingdom with a message of hope and a message of optimism. it's a message that says if the little people, if the real people, if the ordinary decent people are prepared to stand up and fight for what they believe in we can overcome the big banks, we can overcome the multinationals.

and we did it. we made june the 23rd our independence day.

when we smashed the establishment. and we did it. everybody said we would lose but what did we see? we saw experts from all over the world. we saw the international monetary fund. we saw moody's. we saw standard and poor's. we saw global leaders project fear.

telling us that if we voted not to be run by a bunch of unelected old men in brussels.

yeah, well it's okay, they don't like me either so it doesn't really matter does it?

but they told us our economy would fall off of a cliff. they told us there'd be mass unemployment. they told us that investment would leave our country. and david cameron, then our prime minister, but no longer, told us that we might even get world war iii.

and we saw the comentariate and we saw the polling industry doing everything they could to demoralize our campaign. on the day of the vote itself, that morning, they put us ten points behind. and actually, they were all wrong. and they were wrong because what the brexit campaign did is we reached those people who've been let down by modern global corporatism.

we reached those people. we reached those people who have never voted in their lives, but believe by going out and voting for brexit they can take back control of their country, take back control of their borders, and get back their pride and self respect. now, the big card, the big card the prime minister decided to play in the referendum was he got a foreign visitor to come to london. to talk to us.

yes, we were visited by one barack obama. and he talked down to us. he treated us as if we were nothing. one of the oldest functioning democracies in the world. and here he was told us to vote remain.

so i, having criticized, having criticized and condemned his behavior, i could not possibly tell you how you should vote in this election, but, but, you know i get it, i get it, i get it, i get it, i'm hearing you, but i will say this, if i was an american citizen, i wouldn't vote for hillary clinton if you paid me.

in fact, i wouldn't vote for hillary clinton if she paid me.

folks, the message is clear. the parallels are there.

there are millions of ordinary americans who have been let down, who've had a bad time, who feel the political class in washington are detached from them, who feel so many of their representatives are politically correct parts of that liberal media elite.

they feel people aren't standing up for them and they've actually, in many cases, given up on the whole electoral process. and i think, i think that you have a fantastic opportunity here with this campaign.

you can go out, you can beat the pollsters, you can beat the commentators, you can beat washington. and you'll do it by doing what we did for brexit in britain.

we had our own people's army of ordinary citizens who went out and delivered leaflets, who went to meet people where they worked and where they socialized, who convinced and inspired people to go out if this was the one and only time in their life, and to vote for change.

so my advice to you, if you want change in this country, you better get your walking boots on, you better get out there campaigning and remember, and remember, anything is possible if enough decent people are prepared to stand up against the establishment.

thank you very much, indeed."
wow! thank you, nigel.

what a job! what a job he did. what a job he did against all odds.

thank you, nigel.

that was some job that he did against all odds. everybody said it couldn't be done. and by the way, it's looking like a very wise decision right now by the voters, so i really congratulate nigel and i thank you for being here. thank you.

and if i may, we had some tremendous polls come out today. i won't bring it up, i refuse to mention it, but they were very good. we're leading in a lot of locations.

thank you.

it's time for america to recapture, like you just heard, to recapture our destiny. our government leaders and our media have totally lost touch with the people. they have, they have totally lost touch.

you need no better evidence of that then the fact that the media ignores the plight of americans who have lost their children to illegal immigrants, but spends day after day pushing for amnesty for those here in total violation of the law. we can't allow that.

why do our leaders spend so much time talking about how to help people here illegally, they're here illegally, and they spend and they work and they try so hard to help them, but they don't try helping american citizens, some of whom have been devastated by what's happened to their children and their families? devastated.

jobs, wages and security for americans.

and the immigration policy i support as president must pass these three tests. first, it must improve jobs and wages for united states citizens.

we have people in this room who were making more money in real wages 18 years ago, were not working as hard as they're working now and they've gotten older, not supposed to be that way, and in many cases and largely because of the disaster known as "obamacare" they have to hold two jobs, not one, but two jobs and, in some cases, three jobs.

not going to happen, folks, not going to happen.

second, it must improve the safety and security for united states citizens.

third, it must improve the quality of life for u.s. citizens. the quality of life, our quality of life is going down.

our level of security, you look back years, you're more insecure now in terms of security than you were 10, 15 and 20 years ago.

hillary clinton's radical immigration plan fails these tests and it fails them very, very badly. her push for open borders will lower the wages and kill the jobs of lawful american residents.

her support for catch-and-release will put innocent american lives at risk and already has, just like president obama released the illegal immigrant at the border who then killed magnificent, magnificent sarah root.

yesterday i met with her mom, michelle. hillary clinton only talks about the separation of families who choose to come here illegally. i want to focus on the american families who have been permanently separated from their children because of the sanctuary cities and open borders that hillary clinton so strongly supports.

where is the sanctuary for american children? where is that sanctuary? the dreamers we never talk about are the young americans. why aren't young americans dreamers also? i want my dreamers to be young americans.

hillary clinton also wants to push to bring in 620,000 refugees in her first term

a large number of whom come from large countries where women and gays are horribly brutalized, which will weaken our tolerant way of life.

i only want to bring people to our country who share our values and love our people and are capable of loving america.

importantly, i will also create millions and millions of jobs for our people.

we are going to cut taxes, reduce regulations, fix our trade deals, unleash american energy and repeal and replace the horror show known as "obamacare."

we are going to create jobs, jobs, jobs!

i will be the greatest jobs president that god ever created, believe me.

so we're going to have millions and millions of jobs, jobs like you have never seen in this country before, because our jobs are being stolen from us, our companies are being stolen from us, our manufacturing is down by 40 percent and 50 percent and numbers that nobody even believes. those days will be over if  is elected president of the united states, believe me.

rising incomes, higher wages, thousands of new companies all across this nation, they'll come in and they'll form. we are going to renegotiate the worst trade deal ever made, not only in this country, but anywhere in the world, known as nafta and signed by bill clinton.

we're going to stand up to china on trade. we're going to keep out of what will be a disastrous trade deal, trans-pacific partnership, tpp.

it will not happen with me. it will absolutely happen with crooked hillary, believe me.

this state has lost more than 40 percent of its manufacturing jobs since bill clinton signed nafta, and it's lost one in four manufacturing jobs since he put china into the world trade organization, both deals supported by hillary clinton. horrible deals, destructive deals, what those deals have done to our jobs and to our country.

we are going to bring back jobs to mississippi

and in north carolina, which has treated me so well, and ohio and to michigan where our auto plants are leaving and leaving and leaving and going to mexico and other places, and to pennsylvania, where i went to school, and to maryland and all across this land. we're going to bring our jobs back and we're not going to let our jobs be taken away.

thank you. thank you.

and i'm going to make it my personal mission to bring opportunity, safety and prosperity to our very, very troubled inner cities.

the democratic party has failed and betrayed the african-american community.

democratic crime policies, education policies and economic policies have produced only more crime, more broken homes and more poverty than we've ever had in those communities before.

nearly four in 10 african-american children live in poverty. fifty-eight percent of african-american youth are not working. more than 2,700 people have been shot in chicago since the beginning of this year alone.

violent crime has risen 17 percent, and in america's 50 largest cities it's only going one way, folks, and that's up. homicides are up nearly 50 percent in washington, d.c. and more than 60 percent from last year in baltimore.

the democratic party has taken the votes of african americans totally for granted, and they've done nothing in return.

they've just assumed they'll get your support and they've done nothing, absolutely nothing to deserve it.

it's time to give the democrats some competition for african- american votes and for hispanic votes.

it's time to rebuild the inner cities of america and do it properly. it's time to reject the failed leadership of a rigged political system. and i was the first to use that term, it's a rigged, disgusting system.

to those hurting and suffering and left behind, i say, what do you have to lose by trying something new? what do you have to lose by voting for  for president? what do you have to lose? i will fix the problem. i will fix the problem.

if you keep voting for the same people, you will keep getting the same horrible results.

but i also want to talk about what you have to gain, right? right? what do you have to gain? we will create school choice and allow charter schools to absolutely thrive.

what else will we gain? we will empower young americans to pursue their dreams of opening a small business and make it easier for them to get the credit that they need.

we will renegotiate our horrible trade deals to bring back jobs and opportunity. and the african-american community and the hispanic community will be our biggest beneficiary of that.

we will lower taxes and unleash job creation and we will tap into trillions of dollars in new energy wealth that we never even knew we had before.

we will protect your jobs from illegal immigration and broken visa programs. and we will rebuild the roads, the bridges, the infrastructure, the tunnels, the airports in your communities and we will rebuild it with our companies, with our steel and with our labor.

hillary clinton is a bigot who sees people of color

only as votes, not as human beings worthy of a better future. she's going to do nothing for african americans. she's going to do nothing for the hispanics. she's only going to take care of herself, her husband, her consultants, her donors. these are the people she cares about. she doesn't care what her policies have done to your communities. she doesn't care.

remember this. you've had her policies, democrats running some of the inner cities for 50, 70, 80, even over a hundred years. and look what you have right now, poverty, no education, crime, you can't walk down the street with your child. we're going to fix it, we're going to fix it.

hillary clinton has no remorse. i will fight to create a better future for every american. the hedge fund managers and wall street donors are throwing money at hillary clinton to try and stop our change agenda.

of course, if they start looking at the polls they may stop doing that.

they're going to have to start studying those polls. that's why you need to come out and you have to vote, you have to vote.

that is why you must make your voice heard on november 8th, have to do it.

another crucial issue in this race is national security. hillary clinton may go down as the worst secretary of state that has ever served in that office.

let's look back at the middle east at the very beginning of 2009 before the obama/clinton administration, that i call a catastrophe, took over. libya was stable. syria was under control. iraq was experiencing a reduction in violence. the group that would become what we now call isis was close to being extinguished, would never have happened. iran was being choked off by economic sanctions.

fast forward to today. after spending $4 trillion, maybe $5 trillion, nobody even knows how much money has been sucked out of our country, what have the decisions of obama/clinton produced?

libya is in ruins. our ambassador and three other brave americans are dead. and isis has gained a new base of operations, they're all over the world

syria is in the midst of a totally disastrous civil war. isis controls large portions of the territory.

a refugee crisis now threatens europe and is threatening the united states because hillary is allowing these people to pour into our country and we don't know who they are, where they come from. we know nothing.

iraq is in chaos and isis is on the loose.

isis has spread across the middle east and into the west. at the same time, isis is trying to infiltrate refugee flows into europe and definitely folks, definitely, i have been very good at predicting, definitely to the united states.

iran has become the world's largest state sponsor of terrorism, is now flush with up to $150 billion in cash released by the united states, plus another $400 million in cash, cash, cash ransom

that president obama said had nothing to do with ransom, had nothing to do with the hostages, and his own people said he was wrong.

he lied. he lied. just like he said obamacare, "keep your plan, you'll keep your doctor," 28 times, "keep your plan, keep your doctor." and because of that lie, democrats that would have never passed it passed it and now they regret that they passed it because it is a total disaster.

worst of all, the nuclear deal puts iran, the number-one state sponsor of radical islamic terrorism, on a path to nuclear weapons. in short, the obama/clinton foreign policy has unleashed isis, destabilized the middle east and put the nation of iran, which chants, constantly chants "death to america" in a dominant position of regional power and in fact aspiring to be a dominant world power. and we put them there over the last three years!

this is the legacy of barack obama and hillary clinton: death, destruction, terrorism and weakness.

but hillary clinton's legacy does not have to be america's legacy. we're going to end the era of nation-building, a disastrous concept, a disastrous era, and create new foreign policy joined by our partners in the middle east that is focused completely on destroying isis. we have no choice destroying isis.

we will extend a hand of friendship to any nation that will work with us in good faith on this vital mission.

i have a message for the terrorists trying to kill our people, our citizens, trying to hurt the world, but trying to hurt the united states: we will find you, we will destroy you and we will win!

thank you. thank you.

this is not only a military fight, but it will also require cyber warfare and financial warfare. it's also an ideological fight. we will confront directly the hateful, it's just so hateful, ideology of radical islam and promote american values and american culture and america's system of government.

only by standing up for and supporting, we have to stand up for and support, our values can we become a united country once again

a country of great jobs and wealth, a country of security and freedom, a country of strength and unity. the future is limitless. all we have to do is believe in america once again. we have to believe it can happen. it can happen.

we will put back our faith in america's special destiny. we will lift the burdens on small business which is being driven into extinction by what's happening in our government. we'll create a level playing field for american workers. we'll never ever let what's happened to them happen to them again. we'll establish justice and opportunity and safety in every community in the land.

i am asking for the vote of every citizen in this country, african american, hispanic, all americans, all americans who want a better, brighter and stronger future for yourselves and for our country.

i am the change candidate. this is our moment to show the whole world that america is back, bigger and better and stronger than ever before.

i am asking for your vote so i can be your champion in the white house. i will be your champion and i will work hard to be your champion.

and i won't be playing golf instead of going to see the people in louisiana who have been devastated by floods.

i'm going to be the champion to every parent who dreams for their children. and to every child who dreams for their future, i say these words to you tonight: i am with you, i will fight for you, and we will win for you, we will win.

together we will make america strong again, we will make america safe again, we will make america great again.

thank you and god bless you. thank you, mississippi. we love mississippi. god bless you. thank you.
thank you. i am so thrilled to be back in washington.

together, we are going to work hard over the next 70 days and we are going to win this state – and we are going to win the white house.

it's going to be a victory for the people. a victory for the everyday citizen whose voice hasn't been heard.

it will be a win for the voters – not the pundits, not the journalists, not the lobbyists, not the global special interests funding my opponent's campaign.

this is going to be your victory.

we are going to create the new american future our children deserve.

in this new future, millions of workers on the sidelines will be returned to the workforce.

crumbling roads, bridges and airports will be replaced with the infrastructure our country needs and deserves.

families trapped in welfare will be provided with jobs and opportunity.

government will become lean, effective, responsible – and honest.

our border will be protected, and our children will be safe.

we will rebuild our inner cities, and provide safety and peace to all of our citizens.

american values and culture will be cherished and celebrated once again.

but to achieve this future, we must break free from the bitter failures of the past – and reject the same insiders telling us the same old lies.

one area where honesty is badly needed is on the subject of economic and living conditions for african-american citizens in the united states.

millions of african-americans in this country have succeeded greatly, and their contributions to every area of our life – now and throughout our history – should be celebrated and cherished. this includes the amazing achievements in art, science, sport, music, medicine, business and so much else. this includes millions of african-american entrepreneurs, innovators and the millions of african-american workers in our middle class.

but we must also talk about those who have been left behind, the millions suffering in disastrous conditions in so many of our inner cities – and neighborhoods afflicted by poverty, drugs, and violence.

no group in america has been more harmed by hillary clinton's policies than african-americans.

there is no better evidence of this fact than hillary clinton's immigration policy, which brings in illegal immigrants and refugees to take jobs from hardworking african-american and hispanic citizens.

instead of providing free healthcare and jobs to millions of refugees from around the world, we should rebuild our inner cities and provide jobs to struggling americans.

tonight, i am asking for the vote of every african-american and hispanic citizen in this country who wants a better future.

the inner cities of our country have been run by the democratic party for fifty, sixty, seventy years.

these democratic policies – the policies of hillary clinton – have produced only poverty, joblessness, failing schools, broken homes, and rising crime.

nearly 4 in 10 african-american children live in poverty, including 45% of children under the age of six. 58% of african-american youth are not working. meanwhile, another 2 million hispanic-americans have been added to the ranks of those in poverty since 2009.

in detroit, half of all its residents do not work. in milwaukee, almost 4 in 10 african-american men between the ages of 24-54 do not have a job.

here, in the state of washington, 65% of latino children and 60% of african-american children live in low-income households.

chicago just had the most violent month in 20 years. more than 2,800 have been shot in chicago since the beginning of the year.

it breaks our hearts.

we cannot let this violence continue. it must be ended.

under a trump administration, it will be ended.

it will be my priority to work with communities, local police, state police and federal law enforcement to dismantle the gangs and to liberate our citizens from violence and poverty and fear. i will appoint the best judges and prosecutors and federal investigators who will make this their personal mission.

there is one thing which can no longer be denied: if you keep voting for the same people, you will keep getting the same results. to those suffering, i say: what do you have to lose by voting for ? i will fix it. i will fight for you as no one ever has before.

let me also tell you what you have to gain: jobs, opportunity, security, and safety.

this means so much to me.

i believe every child in this country – in detroit, in baltimore, in chicago – has the right to live out their lives in safety and peace.

in the wall street journal, heather mac donald of the manhattan institute just wrote an important article about the soaring crime in our inner cities, and the responsibility of democratic politicians for creating this problem.

the article is called: "black lives matter to ." mcdonald writes that "mr. trump's call to restore law and order recognizes the right of inner-city residents to enjoy the same freedom from fear that the rest of america now takes for granted."

freedom from violence is one of the great civil rights issues of our time. so too is the issue of school choice.

we will fight for the right of parents to send their kids to the school that they believe gives their kids the best shot at success.

i will not accept a future in which children of any color in this country are not fully included in the american dream. our whole country loses when we leave millions of talented, aspiring americans on the sidelines. we want to give everyone a chance to contribute their full talents to our economy and our country.

remember: the republican party is the party of lincoln, the party of freedom, equality and opportunity. it is the democratic party that is the party of slavery, the party of jim crow, the party of oppression.

nothing makes me more honored and proud than to be the nominee of abraham lincoln's republican party.

our party will fight to bring hope to every forgotten stretch of this country.

once again, we will be one american nation.

one united people.

and we will have one great future.

that great future will be built on these three critical words: jobs, jobs, jobs.

this will include a complete revitalization of our manufacturing sector, which has been so badly hurt by hillary clinton's policies.

we are bringing the jobs back to our country.

we are going to renegotiate nafta, keep out of the trans-pacific partnership, stand up to china, and fight for every last american job.

the destruction that nafta started will be finished off if the trans-pacific partnership is approved.

that would be a disaster. we won't let it happen.

but that's just the beginning of what we are going to do for american workers.

on taxes, we are going to provide massive tax relief to all working people, and lower the tax rate on small business from 35% down to 15%. low and middle-income parents will also be able to fully deduct the average cost of childcare from their taxes.

on regulations, i am going to direct every agency and department head in my government to identify all needless and job-killing regulations and they will be removed. we will have a temporary moratorium on new regulations to allow our economy to grow and thrive.

economic growth for last quarter has been revised down to 1.1%, a total disaster. meanwhile, our trade deficit in goods with the world is now nearly $800 billion dollars.

we will further bring back our jobs by unleashing an american energy revolution – lifting restrictions on oil, coal, natural gas and all sources of american energy. this will create millions of jobs and lower the price of energy for all families.

we are also going to secure our border to stop the drugs from pouring in. the seattle-area recently experienced the largest number of heroin-related deaths in 20 years. we have to stop the drugs poisoning our communities.

another major issue in this race is foreign policy. hillary clinton has made one bad foreign policy decision after another – beginning with her support for going to war in iraq in the first place, which i opposed.

her tenure as secretary of state may be regarded as the most disastrous in u.s. history.

look at the world before and after she became secretary of state.

pre-hillary, in early 2009, iraq was seeing a reduction in violence.

libya was stable.

syria was under control.

the group we know today as isis was close to being extinguished.

iran was being choked by sanctions.

now, fast-forward to present time.

after hillary, here is what the world looks like:

iraq is in total chaos.

syria is in the midst of a disastrous civil war and a refugee crisis now threatens europe and the united states.

isis has been unleashed onto the entire world.

iran – the world's top state sponsor of terrorism – has been put on the path to nuclear weapons, and was given a $400 million dollar cash ransom payment.

this is the legacy of hillary clinton: death, destruction and terrorism.

america deserves a better legacy.

all of you deserve a better future. i am the change agent.

hillary clinton is the defender of the status quo.

while our country lost badly under hillary clinton, she cashed in big time. bill clinton's speaking fees surged while hillary was secretary of state – bill was paid almost $50 million dollars for speeches during her tenure, an increase of 44% over the previous 4 years.

then there was all the money funneled into the clinton foundation from foreign governments and corporations.

it was pay-for-play. just look at what she did with ubs, or the russian uranium, or disaster relief in haiti, and so many other examples.

but the only way to learn the full depth of her public corruption is to read the 33,000 emails she deleted.

hillary clinton said under oath that she turned over all of her work-related emails. but we know that is one more clinton lie. the fbi found thousands of work-related emails she never turned over, and then another 15,000 emails were just discovered a few weeks ago.

now, today, another 30 emails were discovered by the state department that hillary clinton failed to turn over – these were emails about benghazi.

it just never ends with the clintons.

there is only one way to get justice in this rigged system and that is to show up and vote on november 8th – and to vote big.

in a trump administration, the state department will work for the country – not for hillary clinton's donors.

under hillary clinton, it's the powerful protecting the powerful.

politicians defending politicians.

insiders fighting for insiders.

i am fighting for you.

the government will work for citizens once again.

the era of division will be replaced with a future of unity.

we are going to do it by emphasizing what we all have in common. we will proudly promote our culture as americans, the best in the world.

it is time to break with the failures of the past, and to fight for every last child in this country to have the better future they deserve.

this is the change i am promising all of you: an honest government, a thriving economy, and a just society for each and every american.

i am asking for your vote so i can be your champion in the white house.

together, we will make america wealthy again.

we will make america strong again.

we will make america proud again.

we will make america safe again.

and we will make america great again.

thank you, and god bless.

wow. thank you. that's a lot of people, phoenix, that's a lot of people.

thank you very much.

thank you, phoenix. i am so glad to be back in arizona.

the state that has a very, very special place in my heart. i love people of arizona and together we are going to win the white house in november.

now, you know this is where it all began for me. remember that massive crowd also. so, i said let's go and have some fun tonight. we're going to arizona, ok?

this will be a little bit different. this won't be a rally speech, per se. instead, i'm going to deliver a detailed policy address on one of the greatest challenges facing our country today, illegal immigration.

i've just landed having returned from a very important and special meeting with the president of mexico, a man i like and respect very much. and a man who truly loves his country, mexico.

and, by the way, just like i am a man who loves my country, the united states.

we agree on the importance of ending the illegal flow of drugs, cash, guns, and people across our border, and to put the cartels out of business.

we also discussed the great contributions of mexican-american citizens to our two countries, my love for the people of mexico, and the leadership and friendship between mexico and the united states. it was a thoughtful and substantive conversation and it will go on for awhile. and, in the end we're all going to win. both countries, we're all going to win.

this is the first of what i expect will be many, many conversations. and, in a trump administration we're going to go about creating a new relationship between our two countries, but it's going to be a fair relationship. we want fairness.

but to fix our immigration system, we must change our leadership in washington and we must change it quickly.

sadly, sadly there is no other way. the truth is our immigration system is worse than anybody ever realized. but the facts aren't known because the media won't report on them. the politicians won't talk about them and the special interests spend a lot of money trying to cover them up because they are making an absolute fortune. that's the way it is.

today, on a very complicated and very difficult subject, you will get the truth. the fundamental problem with the immigration system in our country is that it serves the needs of wealthy donors, political activists and powerful, powerful politicians. it's all you can do. thank you. thank you.

let me tell you who it does not serve. it does not serve you the american people. doesn't serve you. when politicians talk about immigration reform, they usually mean the following, amnesty, open borders, lower wages. immigration reform should mean something else entirely. it should mean improvements to our laws and policies to make life better for american citizens.

thank you. but if we're going to make our immigration system work, then we have to be prepared to talk honestly and without fear about these important and very sensitive issues. for instance, we have to listen to the concerns that working people, our forgotten working people, have over the record pace of immigration and it's impact on their jobs, wages, housing, schools, tax bills and general living conditions.

these are valid concerns expressed by decent and patriotic citizens from all backgrounds, all over. we also have to be honest about the fact that not everyone who seeks to join our country will be able to successfully assimilate. sometimes it's just not going to work out. it's our right, as a sovereign nation to chose immigrants that we think are the likeliest to thrive and flourish and love us.

then there is the issue of security. countless innocent american lives have been stolen because our politicians have failed in their duty to secure our borders and enforce our laws like they have to be enforced. i have met with many of the great parents who lost their children to sanctuary cities and open borders. so many people, so many, many people. so sad. they will be joining me on this stage in a little while and i look forward to introducing, these are amazing, amazing people.

countless americans who have died in recent years would be alive today if not for the open border policies of this administration and the administration that causes this horrible, horrible thought process, called hillary clinton.

this includes incredible americans like 21 year old sarah root. the man who killed her arrived at the border, entered federal custody and then was released into the u.s., think of it, into the u.s. community under the policies of the white house barack obama and hillary clinton. weak, weak policies. weak and foolish policies.

he was released again after the crime, and now he's out there at large. sarah had graduated from college with a 4.0, top student in her class one day before her death.

also among the victims of the obama-clinton open borders policy was grant ronnebeck, a 21-year-old convenience store clerk and a really good guy from mesa, arizona. a lot of you have known about grant.

he was murdered by an illegal immigrant gang member previously convicted of burglary, who had also been released from federal custody, and they knew it was going to happen again.

another victim is kate steinle. gunned down in the sanctuary city of san francisco, by an illegal immigrant, deported five previous times. and they knew he was no good.

then there is the case of 90-year-old earl olander, who was brutally beaten and left to bleed to death in his home, 90 years old and defenseless. the perpetrators were illegal immigrants with criminal records a mile long, who did not meet obama administration standards for removal. and they knew it was going to happen.

in california, a 64-year-old air force veteran, a great woman, according to everybody that knew her, marilyn pharis, was sexually assaulted and beaten to death with a hammer. her killer had been arrested on multiple occasions but was never, ever deported, despite the fact that everybody wanted him out.

a 2011 report from the government accountability office found that illegal immigrants and other non-citizens, in our prisons and jails together, had around 25,000 homicide arrests to their names, 25,000.

on top of that, illegal immigration costs our country more than $113 billion dollars a year.

and this is what we get. for the money we are going to spend on illegal immigration over the next 10 years, we could provide 1 million at-risk students with a school voucher, which so many people are wanting.

while there are many illegal immigrants in our country who are good people, many, many, this doesn't change the fact that most illegal immigrants are lower skilled workers with less education, who compete directly against vulnerable american workers, and that these illegal workers draw much more out from the system than they can ever possibly pay back.

and they're hurting a lot of our people that cannot get jobs under any circumstances.

but these facts are never reported. instead, the media and my opponent discuss one thing and only one thing, the needs of people living here illegally. in many cases, by the way, they're treated better than our vets.

not going to happen anymore, folks. november 8th. not going to happen anymore.

the truth is, the central issue is not the needs of the 11 million illegal immigrants or however many there may be -- and honestly we've been hearing that number for years. it's always 11 million.

our government has no idea. it could be 3 million. it could be 30 million. they have no idea what the number is.

frankly our government has no idea what they're doing on many, many fronts, folks.

but whatever the number, that's never really been the central issue. it will never be a central issue. it doesn't matter from that standpoint. anyone who tells you that the core issue is the needs of those living here illegally has simply spent too much time in washington.

only the out of touch media elites think the biggest problems facing america -- you know this, this is what they talk about, facing american society today is that there are 11 million illegal immigrants who don't have legal status. and, they also think the biggest thing, and you know this, it's not nuclear, and it's not isis, it's not russia, it's not china, it's global warming.

to all the politicians, donors, and special interests, hear these words from me and all of you today. there is only one core issue in the immigration debate, and that issue is the well being of the american people.

nothing even comes a close second. hillary clinton, for instance, talks constantly about her fears that families will be separated, but she's not talking about the american families who have been permanently separated from their loved ones because of a preventable homicide, because of a preventable death, because of murder.

no, she's only talking about families who come here in violation of the law. we will treat everyone living or residing in our country with great dignity. so important.

we will be fair, just, and compassionate to all, but our greatest compassion must be for our american citizens.

thank you.

president obama and hillary clinton have engaged in gross dereliction of duty by surrendering the safety of the american people to open borders, and you know it better than anybody right here in arizona. you know it.

president obama and hillary clinton support sanctuary cities. they support catch and release on the border. they support visa overstays. they support the release of dangerous, dangerous, dangerous, criminals from detention. and, they support unconstitutional executive amnesty.

hillary clinton has pledged amnesty in her first 100 days, and her plan will provide obamacare, social security, and medicare for illegal immigrants, breaking the federal budget.

on top of that she promises uncontrolled, low-skilled immigration that continues to reduce jobs and wages for american workers, and especially for african-american and hispanic workers within our country. our citizens.

most incredibly, because to me this is unbelievable, we have no idea who these people are, where they come from. i always say trojan horse. watch what's going to happen, folks. it's not going to be pretty.

this includes her plan to bring in 620,000 new refugees from syria and that region over a short period of time. and even yesterday, when you were watching the news, you saw thousands and thousands of people coming in from syria. what is wrong with our politicians, our leaders if we can call them that. what the hell are we doing?

hard to believe. hard to believe. now that you've heard about hillary clinton's plan, about which she has not answered a single question, let me tell you about my plan.and do you notice --

and do you notice all the time for weeks and weeks of debating my plan, debating, talking about it, what about this, what about that. they never even mentioned her plan on immigration because she doesn't want to get into the quagmire. it's a tough one, she doesn't know what she's doing except open borders and let everybody come in and destroy our country by the way.

while hillary clinton meets only with donors and lobbyists, my plan was crafted with the input from federal immigration offices, very great people. among the top immigration experts anywhere in this country, who represent workers, not corporations, very important to us.

i also worked with lawmakers, who've led on this issue on behalf of american citizens for many years. and most importantly i've met with the people directly impacted by these policies. so important.

number one, are you ready? are you ready?

we will build a great wall along the southern border.

and mexico will pay for the wall.

one hundred percent. they don't know it yet, but they're going to pay for it. and they're great people and great leaders but they're going to pay for the wall. on day one, we will begin working on intangible, physical, tall, power, beautiful southern border wall.

we will use the best technology, including above and below ground sensors that's the tunnels. remember that, above and below.

above and below ground sensors. towers, aerial surveillance and manpower to supplement the wall, find and dislocate tunnels and keep out criminal cartels and mexico you know that, will work with us. i really believe it. mexico will work with us. i absolutely believe it. and especially after meeting with their wonderful, wonderful president today. i really believe they want to solve this problem along with us, and i'm sure they will.

number two, we are going to end catch and release. we catch them, oh go ahead. we catch them, go ahead.

under my administration, anyone who illegally crosses the border will be detained until they are removed out of our country and back to the country from which they came.

and they'll be brought great distances. we're not dropping them right across. they learned that. president eisenhower. they'd drop them across, right across, and they'd come back. and across.

then when they flew them to a long distance, all of a sudden that was the end. we will take them great distances. but we will take them to the country where they came from, ok?

number three. number three, this is the one, i think it's so great. it's hard to believe, people don't even talk about it. zero tolerance for criminal aliens. zero. zero.

zero. they don't come in here. they don't come in here.

according to federal data, there are at least 2 million, 2 million, think of it, criminal aliens now inside of our country, 2 million people criminal aliens. we will begin moving them out day one. as soon as i take office. day one. in joint operation with local, state, and federal law enforcement.

now, just so you understand, the police, who we all respect -- say hello to the police. boy, they don't get the credit they deserve. i can tell you. they're great people. but the police and law enforcement, they know who these people are.

they live with these people. they get mocked by these people. they can't do anything about these people, and they want to. they know who these people are. day one, my first hour in office, those people are gone.

and you can call it deported if you want. the press doesn't like that term. you can call it whatever the hell you want. they're gone.

beyond the 2 million, and there are vast numbers of additional criminal illegal immigrants who have fled, but their days have run out in this country. the crime will stop. they're going to be gone. it will be over.

they're going out. they're going out fast.

moving forward. we will issue detainers for illegal immigrants who are arrested for any crime whatsoever, and they will be placed into immediate removal proceedings if we even have to do that.

we will terminate the obama administration's deadly, and it is deadly, non-enforcement policies that allow thousands of criminal aliens to freely roam our streets, walk around, do whatever they want to do, crime all over the place.

that's over. that's over, folks. that's over.

since 2013 alone, the obama administration has allowed 300,000 criminal aliens to return back into united states communities. these are individuals encountered or identified by ice, but who were not detained or processed for deportation because it wouldn't have been politically correct.

my plan also includes cooperating closely with local jurisdictions to remove criminal aliens immediately. we will restore the highly successful secure communities program. good program. we will expand and revitalize the popular 287(g) partnerships, which will help to identify hundreds of thousands of deportable aliens in local jails that we don't even know about.

both of these programs have been recklessly gutted by this administration. and those were programs that worked.

this is yet one more area where we are headed in a totally opposite direction. there's no common sense, there's no brain power in our administration by our leader, or our leaders. none, none, none.

here's an interesting graphic from a study published this summer on voting attitudes among people who heard incumbents use restrictive rhetoric on immigration -- tough enforcement, no amnesty, deportations -- and its affect on their own opinions.

on my first day in office i am also going to ask congress to pass kate's law, named for kate steinle.

to ensure that criminal aliens convicted of illegal reentry receive strong mandatory minimum sentences. strong.

and then we get them out.

another reform i'm proposing is the passage of legislation named for detective michael davis and deputy sheriff danny oliver, to law enforcement officers recently killed by a previously deported illegal immigrant.

the davis-oliver bill will enhance cooperation with state and local authorities to ensure that criminal immigrants and terrorists are swiftly, really swiftly, identified and removed. and they will go face, believe me. they're going to go.

we're going to triple the number of ice deportation officers.

within ice i am going to create a new special deportation task force focused on identifying and quickly removing the most dangerous criminal illegal immigrants in america who have evaded justice just like hillary clinton has evaded justice, ok?

maybe they'll be able to deport her.

the local police who know every one of these criminals, and they know each and every one by name, by crime, where they live, they will work so fast. and our local police will be so happy that they don't have to be abused by these thugs anymore. there's no great mystery to it, they've put up with it for years, and no finally we will turn the tables and law enforcement and our police will be allowed to clear up this dangerous and threatening mess.

we're also going to hire 5,000 more border patrol agents.

who gave me their endorsement, 16,500 gave me their endorsement.

and put more of them on the border instead of behind desks which is good. we will expand the number of border patrol stations significantly.

i've had a chance to spend time with these incredible law enforcement officers, and i want to take a moment to thank them. what they do is incredible.

and getting their endorsement means so much to me. more to me really than i can say. means so much. first time they've ever endorsed a presidential candidate.

number four, block funding for sanctuary cities. we block the funding. no more funds.

we will end the sanctuary cities that have resulted in so many needless deaths. cities that refuse to cooperate with federal authorities will not receive taxpayer dollars, and we will work with congress to pass legislation to protect those jurisdictions that do assist federal authorities.

number five, cancel unconstitutional executive orders and enforce all immigration laws.

we will immediately terminate president obama's two illegal executive amnesties in which he defied federal law and the constitution to give amnesty to approximately five million illegal immigrants, five million.

and how about all the millions that are waiting on line, going through the process legally? so unfair.

hillary clinton has pledged to keep both of these illegal amnesty programs, including the 2014 amnesty which has been blocked by the united states supreme court. great.

clinton has also pledged to add a third executive amnesty. and by the way, folks, she will be a disaster for our country, a disaster in so many other ways.

and don't forget the supreme court of the united states. don't forget that when you go to vote on november 8. and don't forget your second amendment. and don't forget the repeal and replacement of obamacare.

and don't forget building up our depleted military. and don't forget taking care of our vets. don't forget our vets. they have been forgotten.

clinton's plan would trigger a constitutional crisis unlike almost anything we have ever seen before. in effect, she would be abolishing the lawmaking powers of congress in order to write her own laws from the oval office. and you see what bad judgment she has. she has seriously bad judgment.

can you imagine? in a trump administration all immigration laws will be enforced, will be enforced. as with any law enforcement activity, we will set priorities. but unlike this administration, no one will be immune or exempt from enforcement. and ice and border patrol officers will be allowed to do their jobs the way their jobs are supposed to be done.

anyone who has entered the united states illegally is subject to deportation. that is what it means to have laws and to have a country. otherwise we don't have a country.

our enforcement priorities will include removing criminals, gang members, security threats, visa overstays, public charges. that is those relying on public welfare or straining the safety net along with millions of recent illegal arrivals and overstays who've come here under this current corrupt administration.

number six, we are going to suspend the issuance of visas to any place where adequate screening cannot occur.

according to data provided by the senate subcommittee on immigration, and the national interest between 9/11 and the end of 2014, at least 380 foreign born individuals were convicted in terror cases inside the united states. and even right now the largest number of people are under investigation for exactly this that we've ever had in the history of our country.

our country is a mess. we don't even know what to look for anymore, folks. our country has to straighten out. and we have to straighten out fast.

the number is likely higher. but the administration refuses to provide this information, even to congress. as soon as i enter office i am going to ask the department of state, which has been brutalized by hillary clinton, brutalized.

homeland security and the department of justice to begin a comprehensive review of these cases in order to develop a list of regions and countries from which immigration must be suspended until proven and effective vetting mechanisms can be put in place.

i call it extreme vetting right? extreme vetting. i want extreme. it's going to be so tough, and if somebody comes in that's fine but they're going to be good. it's extreme.

and if people don't like it, we've got have a country folks. got to have a country. countries in which immigration will be suspended would include places like syria and libya. and we are going to stop the tens of thousands of people coming in from syria.we have no idea who they are, where they come from. there's no documentation. there's no paperwork. it's going to end badly folks. it's going to end very, very badly.

for the price of resettling, one refugee in the united states, 12 could be resettled in a safe zone in their home region. which i agree with 100 percent. we have to build safe zones and we'll get the money from gulf states. we don't want to put up the money. we owe almost $20 trillion. doubled since obama took office, our national debt.

but we will get the money from gulf states and others. we'll supervise it. we'll build safe zones which is something that i think all of us want to see.

another reform, involves new screening tests for all applicants that include, and this is so important, especially if you get the right people. and we will get the right people. an ideological certification to make sure that those we are admitting to our country share our values and love our people.

thank you. we're very proud of our country. aren't we? really? with all it's going through, we're very proud of our country. for instance, in the last five years, we've admitted nearly 100,000 immigrants from iraq and afghanistan. and these two countries according to pew research, a majority of residents say that the barbaric practice of honor killings against women are often or sometimes justified. that's what they say.

that's what they say. they're justified. right? and we're admitting them to our country. applicants will be asked their views about honor killings, about respect for women and gays and minorities. attitudes on radical islam, which our president refuses to say and many other topics as part of this vetting procedure. and if we have the right people doing it, believe me, very, very few will slip through the cracks. hopefully, none.

number seven, we will insure that other countries take their people back when they order them deported.

there are at least 23 countries that refuse to take their people back after they've been ordered to leave the united states. including large numbers of violent criminals, they won't take them back. so we say, ok, we'll keep them. not going to happen with me, not going to happen with me.

due to a supreme court decision, if these violent offenders cannot be sent home, our law enforcement officers have to release them into your communities.

and by the way, the results are horrific, horrific. there are often terrible consequences, such as casey chadwick's tragic death in connecticut just last year. yet despite the existence of a law that commands the secretary of state to stop issuing visas to these countries.

secretary hillary clinton ignored this law and refused to use this powerful tool to bring nations into compliance. and, they would comply if we would act properly.

in other words, if we had leaders that knew what they were doing, which we don't.

the result of her misconduct was the release of thousands and thousands of dangerous criminal aliens who should have been sent home to their countries. instead we have them all over the place. probably a couple in this room as a matter of fact, but i hope not.

according to a report for the boston globe from the year 2008 to 2014 nearly 13,000 criminal aliens were released back into u.s. communities because their home countries would not, under any circumstances, take them back. hard to believe with the power we have. hard to believe.

we're like the big bully that keeps getting beat up. you ever see that? the big bully that keeps getting beat up.

these 13,000 release occurred on hillary clinton's watch. she had the power and the duty to stop it cold, and she decided she would not do it.

and, arizona knows better than most exactly what i'm talking about.

(applause)

those released include individuals convicted of killings, sexual assaults, and some of the most heinous crimes imaginable.

the boston globe writes that a globe review of 323 criminals released in new england from 2008 to 2012 found that as many as 30 percent committed new offenses, including rape, attempted murder, and child molestation. we take them, we take them.

number eight, we will finally complete the biometric entry-exit visa tracking system which we need desperately. for years congress has required biometric entry-exit visa tracking systems, but it has never been completed. the politicians are all talk, no action, never happens. never happens.

hillary clinton, all talk. unfortunately when there is action it's always the wrong decision. you ever notice? in my administration we will ensure that this system is in place. and, i will tell you, it will be on land, it will be on sea, it will be in air. we will have a proper tracking system.

approximately half of new illegal immigrants came on temporary visas and then never, ever left. why should the? nobody's telling them to leave. stay as long as you want, we'll take care of you.

beyond violating our laws, visa overstays, pose -- and they really are a big problem, pose a substantial threat to national security. the 9/11 commission said that this tracking system would be a high priority and would have assisted law enforcement and intelligence officials in august and september in 2001 in conducting a search for two of the 9/11 hijackers that were in the united states expired visas.

and, you know what that would have meant, what that could have meant. wouldn't that have been wonderful, right? what that could have meant?

last year alone nearly half a million individuals overstayed their temporary visas. removing these overstays will be a top priority of my administration.

if people around the world believe they can just come on a temporary visa and never, ever leave, the obama-clinton policy, that's what it is, then we have a completely open border, and we no longer have a country.

we must send a message that visa expiration dates will be strongly enforced.

number nine, we will turn off the jobs and benefits magnet.

we will ensure that e-verify is used to the fullest extent possible under existing law, and we will work with congress to strengthen and expand its use across the country.

immigration law doesn't exist for the purpose of keeping criminals out. it exists to protect all aspects of american life. the work site, the welfare office, the education system, and everything else.

that is why immigration limits are established in the first place. if we only enforced the laws against crime, then we have an open border to the entire world. we will enforce all of our immigration laws.

and the same goes for government benefits. the center for immigration studies estimates that 62 percent of households headed by illegal immigrants use some form of cash or non-cash welfare programs like food stamps or housing assistance.

tremendous costs, by the way, to our country. tremendous costs. this directly violates the federal public charge law designed to protect the united states treasury. those who abuse our welfare system will be priorities for immediate removal.

number 10, we will reform legal immigration to serve the best interests of america and its workers, the forgotten people. workers. we're going to take care of our workers.

and by the way, and by the way, we're going to make great trade deals. we're going to renegotiate trade deals. we're going to bring our jobs back home. we're going to bring our jobs back home.

we have the most incompetently worked trade deals ever negotiated probably in the history of the world, and that starts with nafta. and now they want to go tpp, one of the great disasters.

we're going to bring our jobs back home. and if companies want to leave arizona and if they want to leave other states, there's going to be a lot of trouble for them. it's not going to be so easy. there will be consequence. remember that. there will be consequence. they're not going to be leaving, go to another country, make the product, sell it into the united states, and all we end up with is no taxes and total unemployment. it's not going to happen. there will be consequences.

we've admitted 59 million immigrants to the united states between 1965 and 2015. many of these arrivals have greatly enriched our country. so true. but we now have an obligation to them and to their children to control future immigration as we are following, if you think, previous immigration waves.

we've had some big waves. and tremendously positive things have happened. incredible things have happened. to ensure assimilation we want to ensure that it works. assimilation, an important word. integration and upward mobility.

within just a few years immigration as a share of national population is set to break all historical records. the time has come for a new immigration commission to develop a new set of reforms to our legal immigration system in order to achieve the following goals.

to keep immigration levels measured by population share within historical norms. to select immigrants based on their likelihood of success in u.s. society and their ability to be financially self- sufficient.

we take anybody. come on in, anybody. just come on in. not anymore.

you know, folks, it's called a two-way street. it is a two-way street, right? we need a system that serves our needs, not the needs of others. remember, under a trump administration it's called america first. remember that.

to choose immigrants based on merit. merit, skill, and proficiency. doesn't that sound nice? and to establish new immigration controls to boost wages and to ensure that open jobs are offered to american workers first. and that in particular african- american and latino workers who are being shut out in this process so unfairly.

and hillary clinton is going to do nothing for the african- american worker, the latino worker. she's going to do nothing. give me your vote, she says, on november eighth. and then she'll say, so long, see you in four years. that's what it is.

she is going to do nothing. and just look at the past. she's done nothing. she's been there for 35 years. she's done nothing. and i say what do you have to lose? choose me. watch how good we're going to do together. watch.

you watch. we want people to come into our country, but they have to come into our country legally and properly vetted, and in a manner that serves the national interest. we've been living under outdated immigration rules from decades ago. they're decades and decades old.

to avoid this happening in the future, i believe we should sunset our visa laws so that congress is forced to periodically revise and revisit them to bring them up to date. they're archaic. they're ancient. we wouldn't put our entire federal budget on auto pilot for decades, so why should we do the same for the very, very complex subject of immigration?

so let's now talk about the big picture. these 10 steps, if rigorously followed and enforced, will accomplish more in a matter of months than our politicians have accomplished on this issue in the last 50 years. it's going to happen, folks. because i am proudly not a politician, because i am not behold to any special interest, i've spent a lot of money on my campaign, i'll tell you. i write those checks. nobody owns trump.

i will get this done for you and for your family. we'll do it right. you'll be proud of our country again. we'll do it right. we will accomplish all of the steps outlined above. and, when we do, peace and law and justice and prosperity will prevail. crime will go down. border crossings will plummet. gangs will disappear.

and the gangs are all over the place. and welfare use will decrease. we will have a peace dividend to spend on rebuilding america, beginning with our american inner cities. we're going to rebuild them, for once and for all.

for those here illegally today, who are seeking legal status, they will have one route and one route only. to return home and apply for reentry like everybody else, under the rules of the new legal immigration system that i have outlined above. those who have left to seek entry --

thank you. thank you. those who have left to seek entry under this new system -- and it will be an efficient system -- will not be awarded surplus visas, but will have to apply for entry under the immigration caps or limits that will be established in the future.

we will break the cycle of amnesty and illegal immigration. we will break the cycle. there will be no amnesty.

our message to the world will be this. you cannot obtain legal status or become a citizen of the united states by illegally entering our country. can't do it.

this declaration alone will help stop the crisis of illegal crossings and illegal overstays, very importantly. people will know that you can't just smuggle in, hunker down and wait to be legalized. it's not going to work that way. those days are over.

importantly, in several years when we have accomplished all of our enforcement and deportation goals and truly ended illegal immigration for good, including the construction of a great wall, which we will have built in record time. and at a reasonable cost, which you never hear from the government.

and the establishment of our new lawful immigration system then and only then will we be in a position to consider the appropriate disposition of those individuals who remain.

that discussion can take place only in an atmosphere in which illegal immigration is a memory of the past, no longer with us, allowing us to weigh the different options available based on the new circumstances at the time.

right now, however, we're in the middle of a jobs crisis, a border crisis and a terrorism crisis like never before. all energies of the federal government and the legislative process must now be focused on immigration security. that is the only conversation we should be having at this time, immigration security. cut it off.

whether it's dangerous materials being smuggled across the border, terrorists entering on visas or americans losing their jobs to foreign workers, these are the problems we must now focus on fixing. and the media needs to begin demanding to hear hillary clinton's answer on how her policies will affect americans and their security.

these are matters of life and death for our country and its people, and we deserve answers from hillary clinton. and do you notice, she doesn't answer.

she didn't go to louisiana. she didn't go to mexico. she was invited.

she doesn't have the strength or the stamina to make america great again. believe me.

what we do know, despite the lack of media curiosity, is that hillary clinton promises a radical amnesty combined with a radical reduction in immigration enforcement. just ask the border patrol about hillary clinton. you won't like what you're hearing.

the result will be millions more illegal immigrants; thousands of more violent, horrible crimes; and total chaos and lawlessness. that's what's going to happen, as sure as you're standing there.

this election, and i believe this, is our last chance to secure the border, stop illegal immigration and reform our laws to make your life better. i really believe this is it. this is our last time. november 8. november 8. you got to get out and vote on november 8.

it's our last chance. it's our last chance. and that includes supreme court justices and second amendment. remember that.

so i want to remind everyone what we're fighting for and who we are fighting for.

i am going to ask -- these are really special people that i've gotten to know. i'm going to ask all the angel moms to come join me on the stage right now. these are amazing women.

these are amazing people.

(family members speak individually.)

thank you.

these are amazing people, and i am not asking for their endorsement, believe me that. i just think i've gotten to know so many of them, and many more, from our group. but they are incredible people and what they're going through is incredible, and there's just no reason for it. let's give them a really tremendous hand.

that's tough stuff, i will tell you. that is tough stuff. incredible people.

so, now is the time for these voices to be heard. now is the time for the media to begin asking questions on their behalf. now is the time for all of us as one country, democrat, republican, liberal, conservative to band together to deliver justice, and safety, and security for all americans.

let's fix this horrible, horrible, problem. it can be fixed quickly. let's our secure our border.

let's stop the drugs and the crime from pouring into our country. let's protect our social security and medicare. let's get unemployed americans off the welfare and back to work in their own country.

this has been an incredible evening. we're going to remember this evening. november 8, we have to get everybody. this is such an important state. november 8 we have to get everybody to go out and vote.

we're going to bring -- thank you, thank you. we're going to take our country back, folks. this is a movement. we're going to take our country back.

thank you.

thank you.

this is an incredible movement. the world is talking about it. the world is talking about it and by the way, if you haven't been looking to what's been happening at the polls over the last three or four days i think you should start looking. you should start looking.

together we can save american lives, american jobs, and american futures. together we can save america itself. join me in this mission, we're going to make america great again.

thank you. i love you. god bless you, everybody. god bless you. god bless you, thank you. thank you all so much. what an honor and a privilege to speak today to the american legion.

i thank commander dale barnett, your vice commanders, and your constitutional officers. you have all done such an incredible job.

the men and women of the american legion represent the best of america. strength, courage, selfless devotion. your organization, and its members, have done so much to defend our country, our flag, and to advance the cause of americanism – not globalism.

we are in your debt.

i will never let you down.

together, we are going to work on so many shared goals. but i want to begin by discussing one goal that i know is so important to all of you: promoting american pride and patriotism in america's schools.

in a trump administration, i plan to work directly with the american legion to uphold our common values and to help ensure they are taught to america's children. we want our kids to learn the incredible achievements of america's history, its institutions, and its heroes.

we will stop apologizing for america, and we will start celebrating america.

we will be united by our common culture, values and principles – becoming one american nation.

one country, under one constitution, saluting one american flag.

the flag all of you helped to protect and preserve.

that flag deserves respect, and i will work with american legion to help to strengthen respect for our flag – and, by the way, we want young americans to recite the pledge of allegiance.

in addition to teaching respect for the flag, we also have to make sure we give our military the tools they need to defend that flag and to deter violence and aggression from our foreign adversaries.

we will rebuild our depleted military, and pursue a state-of-the-art missile defense. we will do it based on those three famous words: peace through strength.

we will make sure our soldiers, sailors, airmen and marines have the best equipment, training and tools in the world – and we will ensure that they have the best medical care in the world, both in service, and when they return home as civilians.

that will require a total reform of the veterans administration.

i've laid out a ten-step va reform plan you can review on my website. here are the basics:

i will appoint a secretary of veterans affairs whose personal mission will be to clean up the va.

the secretary's sole mandate will be to serve our veterans – not bureaucrats, not politicians, but veterans.

i am going to use every lawful authority to remove and discipline anyone who fails our veterans or breaches the public trust.

i will appoint a commission to investigate all the wrongdoing at the va, and then present those findings to congress as the basis for reforming the entire system.

we are going to ensure every veteran in america gets timely access to top-quality care, including the best care in the world for our female veterans.

the veterans health system will remain a public system, because it is a public trust. but never again will we allow any veteran to suffer or die waiting for care.

that means veterans will have the right to go to a va facility, or the right to see a private doctor or clinic of their choice – whatever is fastest and best for the veteran. the veteran will be in control.

should i have the honor of serving as president, we are also going to start facing the world with confidence again. we are going to uphold the laws of the nation and defend our sovereignty and security – and our border.

i just came back from a great meeting with the president of mexico, where i expressed my deep respect for the people of his country, and for the tremendous contributions of mexican-americans in our country – including to our armed services.

i want to again thank him for his gracious hospitality, and express my belief that we can work together to accomplish great things for both of our countries.

we agreed in the meeting on the need to stop the illegal flow of guns, drugs, cash and people across the border and to take out the cartels.

we also talked about the importance of working to keep jobs and wealth in our hemisphere. a more prosperous mexico means fewer illegal border crossings, and a better market for products made in the united states.

when i am president, i am going to look at every trade deal we have across the world and see what steps must be taken to protect american jobs and create new opportunities for american workers. we will fight for every last american job.

we're going to show ourselves and the world again what a strong and growing american economy looks like.

we are going to give major tax relief to every worker and small business in this country, bring thousands of new companies and millions of new jobs back to our shores – and unleash an american energy revolution.

we will also be appointing justices who will defend our constitution.

i will nominate men and women to the court who meet the high standard of antonin scalia, judges who have the wisdom and integrity to follow the law and not just make it up.

above all, these next four years, i will be uncompromising in the defense of the united states and our friends and allies. we are going to end the era of nation-building, and create a new foreign policy – joined by our partners in the middle east – that is focused on destroying isis and radical islamic terrorism. we will extend the hand of friendship to any nation that will work with us in good faith on this vital mission.

at the same time, we will change our immigration screening procedures to help keep terrorists and extremists out of our country. that includes stopping the influx of syrian refugees. my opponent wants a 550% increase. i, on the other hand, want to build a safe zone overseas – and use the money saved to invest in america.

it is time to create a new american future – for you, your children, and all american children yet to come.

in this future, we will have an honest government – and that includes an honest state department, not pay-for-play. government access and favors will no longer be for sale, and important email records will no longer be deleted and digitally bleached.

we will also have an efficient and responsible federal budget – no more waste, no more throwing away taxpayer dollars.

once more, we will have a government of, by and for the people.

it will be an inclusive society, one that offers hope and opportunity to every part of this country – including our inner cities. we will ensure that every child in this land, including african-american and hispanic child, is put on the american ladder of success: a good education, and a great job.

we will follow the noble example of our military men and women, working selflessly across all difference races and incomes and backgrounds, to achieve unity and accomplish amazing things.

ladies and gentlemen of the american legion, i ask today for the honor of your vote. working in unison, we can deliver the real american change our country so desperately needs.

we will make america strong again.

we will make america proud again.

we will make america safe again.

we will make america great again.

thank you, and god bless.

it's so great to be back in ohio.

come november, we are going to win this state, we are going to win the white house – and we are going to bring back your jobs.

we are going to negotiate fair trade deals that put american workers first.

we are going to stop the product dumping, the unfair foreign subsidies, and the currency manipulation. we are going to stop the foreign cheating.

the era of economic surrender is over.

a new era of american greatness is beginning.

no state has been hurt worse by the hillary clinton trade policies than ohio.

hillary clinton backed her husband's nafta, she backed china's entrance into the world trade organization, she backed the job-killing trade deal with south korea, and backed the trans-pacific partnership.

one bad deal after another.

hillary clinton's donors own her, and she will do whatever they tell her to do.

ohio has lost nearly 1 in 3 manufacturing jobs since nafta, and nearly 1 in 4 manufacturing jobs since china entered the world trade organization.

our trade deficit in goods with the world is now nearly $800 billion dollars. this subtracts directly from our growth – our economy grew only 1.1 percent in the last quarter, a total disaster.

this is the legacy of hillary clinton.

i am promising a new legacy for america.

we are going to create a new american future.

but to do that, we have to stop the trans-pacific partnership.

our trade deficit with the proposed tpp member countries cost the state of ohio more than 100,000 manufacturing jobs last year. imagine how many more jobs would be lost if tpp was actually approved.

hillary clinton, who called the tpp the "gold standard", would 100% approve it if she ever got in.

we won't let that happen.

we will win this election, and we will keep america out of the tpp.

we will defend our freedom, our jobs, and our economic independence.

it's going to be america first.

my economic plan is going to grow this economy, raise your wages, and create millions of new jobs.

here are a few of the things we will do:

a massive tax cut for working americans.

we are going to eliminate regulations that kill american jobs, and that includes getting rid of the obama administration's new anti-energy rules that will raise ohio energy bills by more than 40 percent.

hillary clinton says she wants to "put a lot of coal miners and coal companies out of business." just like she wants to put the steel workers out of business.

we are going to put the miners and the steel workers back to work – and we are going to get your energy bills down.

we are going to repeal and replace obamacare, saving another 2 million jobs over the next decade.

we are going to create jobs for all of our people, and we are going to fight to ensure that every young african-american and latino child is put on the ladder of american success: a good education, and a great job.

another major part of our agenda is immigration security. we need to protect american jobs. we need to protect american safety.

last night, i outlined a detailed plan to provide jobs, safety and security to the american people with bold new immigration reforms.

i had a great meeting yesterday with the president of mexico where we both expressed our shared desire to secure the border, put the cartels out of business, and to keep jobs in our hemisphere.

let's also talk about government corruption.

no issue better illustrates how corrupt my opponent is than her pay-for-play scandals as secretary of state.

here is one example of clinton corruption.

as secretary of state, hillary clinton signed off on a deal allowing russians to take an increased stake in a company called uranium one, giving up control of about 20 percent of america's uranium supply to the russians. clinton's approval of the deal netted the owners of the uranium company millions of dollars. in exchange for signing off on the deal, some of the former owners of uranium one gave the clinton foundation millions of dollars in donations. in addition, bill clinton received $500,000 for a speech to a kremlin-backed investment firm that was a beneficiary of the deal.

here is another example of pay-for-play.

in 2009, ericsson telecommunications came under u.s. pressure for selling telecom equipment to several oppressive governments – including sudan, syria, and iran. some these regimes used those technologies to monitor and control their own people.

in june 2011, hillary clinton's state department began adding goods and service to a list that might be covered under expanded sanctions on iran and other state sponsors of terrorism.

during that time, ericsson sponsored a speech by bill clinton, paying him $750,000 – his highest paying speech.

in april 2012, the obama administration issued an executive order imposing sanctions on telecom sales to iran and syria –but those sanctions did not cover ericsson's work in iran.

a trump administration will end the government corruption.

no one will be above the law.

we will have one set of rules for everyone. in hillary clinton's world, we have one set of rules for her – and another set of rules for everyone else.

i am fighting for everyone who doesn't have a voice. the forgotten men and women of america.

i am your voice.

hillary clinton's campaign is funded by wall street and hedge fund managers.

my campaign is powered by my own money, but also by small dollar donations from working people across this country who want their country back.

nothing terrifies the ruling class more than when everyday working people give 5, 10, or 15 dollars to our campaign to help us take government away from the special interests and give it back to the voters.

come november 8th, we are once again going to have a government that serves you, your family, and your country.

we are going to rebuild our depleted military, avoid needless foreign wars, build new friendships overseas, and remember those three famous words: peace through strength.

we are going to work with our allies to crush, defeat, and utterly destroy isis.

we are going to have a new immigration screening test to keep people out of our country who don't support our tolerant values.

my tax reforms will add millions of new jobs and thousands of new small businesses.

my energy reforms will create millions of new jobs and lower the prince of your energy bill.

my trade reforms will raise wages, grow jobs and add trillions in new wealth into our country.

my immigration reforms will protect your jobs and stop businesses from exploiting visas programs that hurt poor workers.

my infrastructure plans will rebuild your roads, bridges and airports.

my regulatory reforms will make it easier for african-americans small businesses to thrive, and for young children to live out their dreams.

my promise of school choice, charter schools and merit-pay for teachers will help low-income students in our inner cities. hillary clinton discriminates against poor african-american children by opposing school choice.

my government reforms will make your voice heard – not the voice of the special interests.

every insider, getting rich off of our broken system, is throwing money at hillary clinton.

it's the powerful protecting the powerful.

insiders fighting for insiders.

i am fighting for you.

every day you turn on the nightly news, you hear about how some self-interested banker or some washington insider says they oppose our campaign. or some encrusted old politician says they oppose our campaign. or some big time lobbyist says they oppose our campaign.

i wear their opposition as a badge of honor. because it means i am fighting for real change, not just partisan change. i am fighting – all of us across the country are fighting – for peaceful regime change in our own country. the media-donor-political complex that's bled this country dry has to be replaced with a new government of, by and for the people.

i will fight to ensure that every american is treated equally, protected equally, and honored equally. we will reject bigotry and hatred and oppression in all of its forms, and seek a new future of security, prosperity and opportunity – a future built on our common culture and values as one american people.

i am asking for your vote so i can be your champion in the white house.

to every parent who dreams for their children, and to every child who dreams for their future, i say these words to you tonight: i'm with you, i will fight for you, and i will win for you.

together, we will make america strong again.

we will make american safe again.

and we will make america great again.

thank you, and god bless. it's so great to be back in ohio.

come november, we are going to win this state, we are going to win the white house – and we are going to bring back your jobs.

we are going to negotiate fair trade deals that put american workers first.

we are going to stop the product dumping, the unfair foreign subsidies, and the currency manipulation. we are going to stop the foreign cheating.

the era of economic surrender is over.

a new era of american greatness is beginning.

no state has been hurt worse by the hillary clinton trade policies than ohio.

hillary clinton backed her husband's nafta, she backed china's entrance into the world trade organization, she backed the job-killing trade deal with south korea, and backed the trans-pacific partnership.

one bad deal after another.

hillary clinton's donors own her, and she will do whatever they tell her to do.

ohio has lost nearly 1 in 3 manufacturing jobs since nafta, and nearly 1 in 4 manufacturing jobs since china entered the world trade organization.

our trade deficit in goods with the world is now nearly $800 billion dollars. this subtracts directly from our growth – our economy grew only 1.1 percent in the last quarter, a total disaster.

this is the legacy of hillary clinton.

i am promising a new legacy for america.

we are going to create a new american future.

but to do that, we have to stop the trans-pacific partnership.

our trade deficit with the proposed tpp member countries cost the state of ohio more than 100,000 manufacturing jobs last year. imagine how many more jobs would be lost if tpp was actually approved.

hillary clinton, who called the tpp the "gold standard", would 100% approve it if she ever got in.

we won't let that happen.

we will win this election, and we will keep america out of the tpp.

we will defend our freedom, our jobs, and our economic independence.

it's going to be america first.

my economic plan is going to grow this economy, raise your wages, and create millions of new jobs.

here are a few of the things we will do:

a massive tax cut for working americans.

we are going to eliminate regulations that kill american jobs, and that includes getting rid of the obama administration's new anti-energy rules that will raise ohio energy bills by more than 40 percent.

hillary clinton says she wants to "put a lot of coal miners and coal companies out of business." just like she wants to put the steel workers out of business.

we are going to put the miners and the steel workers back to work – and we are going to get your energy bills down.

we are going to repeal and replace obamacare, saving another 2 million jobs over the next decade.

we are going to create jobs for all of our people, and we are going to fight to ensure that every young african-american and latino child is put on the ladder of american success: a good education, and a great job.

another major part of our agenda is immigration security. we need to protect american jobs. we need to protect american safety.

last night, i outlined a detailed plan to provide jobs, safety and security to the american people with bold new immigration reforms.

i had a great meeting yesterday with the president of mexico where we both expressed our shared desire to secure the border, put the cartels out of business, and to keep jobs in our hemisphere.

let's also talk about government corruption.

no issue better illustrates how corrupt my opponent is than her pay-for-play scandals as secretary of state.

here is one example of clinton corruption.

as secretary of state, hillary clinton signed off on a deal allowing russians to take an increased stake in a company called uranium one, giving up control of about 20 percent of america's uranium supply to the russians. clinton's approval of the deal netted the owners of the uranium company millions of dollars. in exchange for signing off on the deal, some of the former owners of uranium one gave the clinton foundation millions of dollars in donations. in addition, bill clinton received $500,000 for a speech to a kremlin-backed investment firm that was a beneficiary of the deal.

here is another example of pay-for-play.

in 2009, ericsson telecommunications came under u.s. pressure for selling telecom equipment to several oppressive governments – including sudan, syria, and iran. some these regimes used those technologies to monitor and control their own people.

in june 2011, hillary clinton's state department began adding goods and service to a list that might be covered under expanded sanctions on iran and other state sponsors of terrorism.

during that time, ericsson sponsored a speech by bill clinton, paying him $750,000 – his highest paying speech.

in april 2012, the obama administration issued an executive order imposing sanctions on telecom sales to iran and syria –but those sanctions did not cover ericsson's work in iran.

a trump administration will end the government corruption.

no one will be above the law.

we will have one set of rules for everyone. in hillary clinton's world, we have one set of rules for her – and another set of rules for everyone else.

i am fighting for everyone who doesn't have a voice. the forgotten men and women of america.

i am your voice.

hillary clinton's campaign is funded by wall street and hedge fund managers.

my campaign is powered by my own money, but also by small dollar donations from working people across this country who want their country back.

nothing terrifies the ruling class more than when everyday working people give 5, 10, or 15 dollars to our campaign to help us take government away from the special interests and give it back to the voters.

come november 8th, we are once again going to have a government that serves you, your family, and your country.

we are going to rebuild our depleted military, avoid needless foreign wars, build new friendships overseas, and remember those three famous words: peace through strength.

we are going to work with our allies to crush, defeat, and utterly destroy isis.

we are going to have a new immigration screening test to keep people out of our country who don't support our tolerant values.

my tax reforms will add millions of new jobs and thousands of new small businesses.

my energy reforms will create millions of new jobs and lower the prince of your energy bill.

my trade reforms will raise wages, grow jobs and add trillions in new wealth into our country.

my immigration reforms will protect your jobs and stop businesses from exploiting visas programs that hurt poor workers.

my infrastructure plans will rebuild your roads, bridges and airports.

my regulatory reforms will make it easier for african-americans small businesses to thrive, and for young children to live out their dreams.

my promise of school choice, charter schools and merit-pay for teachers will help low-income students in our inner cities. hillary clinton discriminates against poor african-american children by opposing school choice.

my government reforms will make your voice heard – not the voice of the special interests.

every insider, getting rich off of our broken system, is throwing money at hillary clinton.

it's the powerful protecting the powerful.

insiders fighting for insiders.

i am fighting for you.

every day you turn on the nightly news, you hear about how some self-interested banker or some washington insider says they oppose our campaign. or some encrusted old politician says they oppose our campaign. or some big time lobbyist says they oppose our campaign.

i wear their opposition as a badge of honor. because it means i am fighting for real change, not just partisan change. i am fighting – all of us across the country are fighting – for peaceful regime change in our own country. the media-donor-political complex that's bled this country dry has to be replaced with a new government of, by and for the people.

i will fight to ensure that every american is treated equally, protected equally, and honored equally. we will reject bigotry and hatred and oppression in all of its forms, and seek a new future of security, prosperity and opportunity – a future built on our common culture and values as one american people.

i am asking for your vote so i can be your champion in the white house.

to every parent who dreams for their children, and to every child who dreams for their future, i say these words to you tonight: i'm with you, i will fight for you, and i will win for you.

together, we will make america strong again.

we will make american safe again.

and we will make america great again.

thank you, and god bless.
"thank you. that's so nice. thank you.

"well, that's so nice. and, bishop jackson, i want to thank you and dr. jackson and you have some voice, i have to say. incredible. and some spirit, some spirit. talent.

"thank you. well, i just wrote this the other day knowing i'd be here. and, i mean it from the heart and i'd like to just read it and i think you'll understand it maybe better than i do in certain ways.

"for centuries, the african-american church has been the conscience of our country. so true. it's from the pews and pulpits and christian teachings of black churches all across this land that the civil rights movement lifted up its soul and lifted up the soul of our nation. it's from these pews that our nation has been inspired toward a better moral character, a deeper concern for mankind, and spirit of charity and unity that binds us all together. and we're bound together and i see that today. this has been an amazing day for me.

"the african-american faith community has been one of god's greatest gifts to america and to its people. there is perhaps no action our leaders can take that would do more to heal our country and support our people than to provide a greater platform to the black churches and church-goers. you do right everyday by your community and your families. you raise children in the light of god; i will always support your church, always. and defend your right to worship . . . so important.

"i am here today to listen to your message and i hope that my presence here will also help your voice to reach new audiences in our country and many of these audiences desperately need your spirit and your thought. i can tell you that.

"christian faith is not the past but the present and the future. make it stronger. and we'll open it up to great, great leaders like pastor jackson, bishop jackson, dr. jackson, and so many others. and so many others actually sitting here. darrell scott, who is phenomenal, who has been with me for so long. so long. omrosea, who is a very nice person and i don't want to say that. because i'll destroy her image by saying that. she's actually a very, very fine person and pastor. and i want to thank all the folks and there is somebody that's been very special to me, dr. ben carson who's been . . . stand up, ben. come here, come here. come here, ben. this is a great man and great guy.

"so, as i prepare to campaign all across the nation, and in every community, i will have an opportunity to lay out my plans for economic change. which will be so good for detroit and so good for this community because we're going to bring jobs back. i will have a chance . . . thank you. we're bringing them back. we're taking them from mexico and everywhere else because they're gone.

"i will have a chance to discuss school choice. its very important. and how to put every american on the ladder of success. a great education, a great job. but today, i just want to let you know that i am here to listen to you and i have been doing that. and we had a fantastic interview with bishop jackson. it was really an amazing interview. he is better than the people who do that professionally. i will tell you. it's true. it's true. it's true. he's better.

"and i didn't really know what i was getting into. i didn't know. is this going to be nice? is this going to be wild? he's a great gentleman and a very smart guy. i just hope you don't lose him to hollywood. that's the only problem. and especially, and especially dr. jackson, she may be gone. hollywood is calling. look at all those television cameras back there. look at all the television cameras. i'm sorry to do that to you, bishop. because, it's just one of those things, right?

"our nation is too divided. we talk past each other, not to each other and those who seek office do not do enough to step into the community and learn what is going on. they don't know. they have no clue. i'm here today to learn. so that we can together remedy injustice, in any form. and so that we can also remedy economics so that the african-american community can benefit economically through jobs and income and so many other different ways.

"our political system has failed the people and works only to enrich itself. i want to reform that system so that it works for you, everyone in this room. i believe true reform can only come from outside the system. i really mean that. being a businessman is much different than being a politician because i understand what is happening. and we are going outside the establishment.

"becoming the nominee of the party of abraham lincoln — a lot of people don't realize that abraham lincoln, the great abraham lincoln was a republican — has been the greatest honor of my life. it is on his legacy that i hope to build the future of the party but more important the future of the country and the community.

"i believe that we need a civil rights agenda for our time. one that ensures the rights to a great education — so important — and the right to live in safety and in peace and to have a really, really great job. a good paying job and one that you love going to every morning. that can happen. we need to bring our companies back.

"it also means the right to have a government that protects our works and fights, really fights for our jobs. i want to help you build and rebuild detroit. and we can do that especially with people like bishop jackson and dr. jackson. i mean that. it's been an amazing experience. it's been an amazing experience. really.

"nothing is more sad than when we sideline young black men with unfulfilled potential, tremendous potential. i met some people this morning that are incredible people and they're looking for jobs. these are incredible people . . . young people. our whole country loses out when we're unable to harness the brilliance and the energy of these folks

"we're one nation and when anyone hurts, we all hurt together. that is so true. so true.

"we're all brothers and sisters and we're all created by the same god. we must love each other and support each other and we are in this all together. all together.

"i fully understand that the african-american community has suffered from discrimination and that there are many wrongs that must still be made right and they will be right. i want america prosperous for everyone. i want to make this city the economic envy of the world and we can do that. we can do that again.

"factories everywhere, new roads and bridges, new schools — especially schools — and new hope.

"i have been so greatly blessed, and in so many ways, with no greater blessing than my family. i've had a great family.

"nothing would make me happier and more fulfilled than to use what i have learned in business and in traveling all over the world — i've sort of seen a lot — to bring the wealth and prosperity and opportunity to those who have not had these opportunities before. and that's many, many people in detroit.

"when i see wages falling, people out of work, i know the hardships this inflicts and i am determined to do something about it. i will do something about it. i do get things done, i will tell you. some people have strengths, that's one of my strengths, i get things done. i'm going to get things done for you.

"please know this, for any who are hurting, things are going to turn around.tomorrow will be better. much better. the pastor and i were talking about, riding up the street, how we see all those closed stores and people sitting down on the sidewalk, and no jobs, and no activity. we'll get it turned around. we'll get it turned around, pastor. believe me.

"we're going to win again as a country and we're going to win again for all of our people. i want to work with you to renew the bonds of trust between citizens and the bonds of faith that make our nation strong. america has been lifted out of many of its most difficult hours through the miracle of faith and through people like bishop jackson and dr. jackson. so important. people have no idea how important they are.

"now, in these hard times for our country, let us turn again to our christian heritage to lift up the soul of our nation. i am so deeply grateful to be here today and it is my prayer that the america of tomorrow — and i mean that — that the america oftomorrow will be one of unity, togetherness, and peace. and perhaps we can add the word prosperity. ok? prosperity.

"i'd like to conclude with a passage from 1 john, chapter 4. you know it? see, most groups i speak to don't know that. but we know it. if you want, we can say it together: 'no one has ever seen god, but if we love one another, god lives in us and his love is made complete in us.' and that is so true.

"thank you very much. this has been such an honor. thank you very much. bishop, thank you sir. thank you. thank you. thank you." thank you. it's great to be back in north carolina.

in 62 days, we are going to win this state – and we are going to win the white house.

this is our chance to end years of injustice, corruption and betrayal.

this is our chance to solve all of the problems that have gone unsolved for so many years.

for how long have people been saying washington is broken and controlled by special interests?

this is the year we can finally fix it.

that's because change has to come from outside of our broken and corrupt system.

we will never fix our rigged system by relying on the people who rigged it in the first place.

we will never solve our problems by relying on the politicians who created our problems.

so to every american who has been waiting for real change, your wait is over – your moment of liberation is at hand. a vote for trump is a vote to restore democracy, to heal our economy, and to bring millions of jobs back into every forgotten stretch of this country.

the change will begin my first day in office.

first, we are going to eliminate every unconstitutional executive order and restore the rule of law to our land.

then, we are going to begin implementing plans for construction of a wall along our southern border. this will keep out the violent cartels and gangs, as well as their drugs that are poisoning our youth.

but that's just the beginning.

i am going to ask congress to send me a bill to repeal and replace obamacare. under senate rules, that bill can be passed with 51 votes – meaning a republican congress and a republican president can save americans from this disaster in a single afternoon.

it's going to be a very busy first day.

i am going to instruct the department of state to immediately suspend the syrian refugee resettlement program and develop plans for the construction of a safe zone in the region. my opponent wants a 550% increase in syrian refugees. she is running to be america's angela merkel.

i am also going to notify all countries that refuse to take back dangerous illegal immigrants who have committed crimes in this country that they will lose access to our visa programs if they continue to do so. this is the measure that is called for under current law, and i will enforce it.

the secretary of state is required to take this action, but hillary clinton refused to do so – resulting in thousands of criminal aliens being released into u.s. communities.

furthermore, i will direct every agency in government to begin identifying all wasteful job-killing regulations and they are going to be removed – this will include lifting the restrictions on american energy.

i will also notify our nafta partners of my intention to renegotiate the deal, and will withdraw from the tpp before it can be ratified. we are going to bring these jobs back to north carolina.

hillary clinton supported nafta, she supported china's entry into the world trade organization, and she supported the tpp. she just does whatever her donors tell her to do.

in a trump administration, we will negotiate trade deals on behalf of american workers – not on behalf of global corporations.

we will work to ensure farmers in north carolina have the tools they need to thrive at home and compete on a level playing field in foreign markets – and that means negotiating fair trade deals that put america first.

crucially, i am also going to convene my top generals and give them a simple instruction: they will have 30 days to submit to the oval office a plan for defeating isis. any nation who shares in this goal will be our friend in this mission.

for years, we have been caught up in endless wars and conflicts under the leadership of failed politicians and a failed foreign policy establishment in washington d.c. the same people who made every wrong decision in iraq, afghanistan, libya, syria, egypt, china and russia are the same people who are advising hillary clinton.

i am proud instead to have the support of our warfighting generals, active duty military officers, and top military experts who know how to win – and know how to keep us out of endless war.

today, 88 retired u.s. generals and admirals signed a letter of endorsement.

that's one of the biggest differences between me and hillary clinton. she favors what has been called military adventurism – rushing to invade countries, displacing millions of families, then inviting the refugees into our country – creating power vacuums filled by terrorist groups like isis.

i believe in a foreign policy based on our national interests that focuses on american security and regional stability – instead of using our military to create democracies in countries with no democratic history.

we will work to form partnerships overseas based on a long-term strategy of defeating radical islamic terrorism.

we will first have to reverse the damage inflicted by hillary clinton – her legacy of failure in the middle east, russia and asia has made americans less safe than ever before.

as part of our plan to avoid and prevent foreign conflicts, we are going to rebuild our depleted military. this is the ultimate deterrent.

we will be guided by those three famous words: peace through strength.

i will ask congress to eliminate the sequester and immediately re-invest in our military. right now, we have the smallest air force since 1947, the smallest army since 1939, and one of the smallest navy's since 1917.

like the cold war, we also need to fight this battle by collecting intelligence and then protecting our classified secrets. hillary clinton has taught us all how much of a problem we have with cyber-security.

we can't have someone in the oval office who doesn't understand the meaning of the word confidential.

the new revelations about hillary clinton from the just-released fbi documents make more clear than ever that she fails to meet the minimum standard for running for public office. if she applied for a low-level job at the state department today she couldn't even get a security clearance.

her conduct is disqualifying.

let's run through what we discovered in those fbi documents. it's important, and we're hoping matt lauer will ask about it on wednesday night at the townhall.

it's clear from the fbi report that hillary clinton lied about her handling of confidential information. she repeatedly told the country that she understood the classified system, then she told the fbi she didn't understand that the letter "c" meant confidential in the documents she emailed.

on 39 separate occasions she said she couldn't recall details about her mishandling of classified information, and she couldn't even name one step she took to make sure foreign hackers couldn't get into her server. keep in mind, that her insecure emails included emails about the drone program.

it's also clear from the fbi report that hillary clinton and her top aides knowingly destroyed evidence and covered-up their actions. after her private server was revealed last march, her staff deleted all the emails and wiped it clean using a software designed to prevent any recovery, called bleachbit.

they used hammers to destroy phones so they couldn't be turned over later – and by the way, who uses 12 different phones in 4 years? the only people who use that many phones are usually involved in very, very shady activity.

people who have nothing to hide don't smash phones with hammers. people who have nothing to hide don't bleach their emails, or destroy evidence to keep it from being publicly archived as required under federal law.

hillary clinton failed to turn over thousands of documents, then tried to shield her criminal conduct by having her chief-of-staff declare herself to be hillary clinton's private attorney.

hillary and her top aides told the fbi and others in related lawsuits that they couldn't recall or remember key facts hundreds of different times – and that's in addition to the guy who set up the server pleading the 5th.

no one takes all the risks hillary clinton took unless they are trying to cover up massive crimes.

hillary clinton was using the state department to dole out special favors and access to her friends and donors.

it's called pay-for-play.

one example of pay-for-play is what the clinton's did in haiti. let me stop here for a second and say how much we love and appreciate the haitian-american community in florida and across our country. we send our prayers to the many still suffering in haiti from the earthquake.

but while haiti has suffered, the clintons and their pals have cashed in.

bill and hillary's brothers have signed housing deals in haiti, and one wound up on the board of a gold mining company.

clinton foundation donors have seen the clintons pave the way for their investments.

in one deal, hillary clinton set aside environmental and labor rules to help a south korean company with a record of violating workers' rights set up what amounts to a sweat shop in haiti.

the facility has produced only a fraction of the jobs it promised and faces reports of wage theft.

people are asking: where did all the money go?

this november, it is up to the american people to stop the clintons from raiding america the way they have raided so many other people and places.

one of the groups in america that have been harmed the most by hillary clinton's policies are african-americans. she sees them only as votes, not as people worthy of a better future.

many african-americans have succeeded so greatly in this country, we will honor and protect their achievements. that includes lowering taxes for our small business owners to fifteen percent.

but millions of african-americans in our inner cities remain trapped in poverty, joblessness and failing schools.

the democratic party has run the inner cities for fifty, sixty, seventy years and more.

4 in 10 african-american children in poverty, including 45% of those under the age of six.

58% of african-american youth are not working.

2,900 people have been shot in chicago since the beginning of the year.

nationwide, african-americans are nearly 60% of the murder victims under the age of 22.

this is a national crisis – and anybody who fails to understand that is not fit to seek the presidency of the united states.

to those suffering in crime and poverty, i say: give donald j. trump a chance. what do you have to lose by embracing our platform of change? we are going to bring back your jobs, rebuild your cities, and give parents and students school choice. i will never, ever, ever take you for granted.

we are going to push a new civil rights agenda. we believe every american has the right to a safe community, a great education and government that protects their jobs.

this weekend, i had the honor to join a church service in detroit at the great faith ministries international with the amazing bishop wayne jackson. it was an incredible and deeply moving experience.

i will fight for detroit, for chicago, for baltimore, and for every neglected part of this nation – and i will fight to bring us all together as one american people.

let me quote the same passage from the bible i read on saturday, from 1 john 4: "no one has ever seen god; but, if we love one another, god lives in us and his love is made complete in us."

imagine what we our country could accomplish if we started working together as one people, under one god, saluting one flag.

it is time to break with the bitter failures of the past, and to embrace a new american future.

in this future, we will respect the dignity of all americans – and that means great jobs, great schools, and great neighborhoods.

we will keep our children safe – which requires secure borders, a strong military, and supporting law enforcement.

jobs will return, prosperity will rise, and new factories will come rushing back to our shores.

government corruption will end – and the state department will answer to the voters, not hillary clinton's donors.

republicans are the party of abraham lincoln and, come november 8th, we will once again have a government of, by and for the people.

we will make america proud again.

we will make america strong again.

we will make america safe again.

and will make america great again.

thank you, and god bless!

today, i am here to talk about three crucial words that should be at the center of our foreign policy: peace through strength.

we want to achieve a stable, peaceful world with less conflict and more common ground.

i am proposing a new foreign policy focused on advancing america's core national interests, promoting regional stability, and producing an easing of tensions in the world. this will require rethinking the failed policies of the past.

we can make new friends, rebuild old alliances, and bring new allies into the fold.

i'm proud to have the support of warfighting generals, active duty military, and the top experts who know both how to win – and how to avoid the endless wars we are caught in now. just yesterday, 88 top generals and admirals endorsed my campaign.

in a trump administration, our actions in the middle east will be tempered by realism. the current strategy of toppling regimes, with no plan for what to do the day after, only produces power vacuums that are filled by terrorists.

gradual reform, not sudden and radical change, should be our guiding objective in that region.

we should work with any country that shares our goal of destroying isis and defeating radical islamic terrorism, and form new friendships and partnerships based on this mission. we now have an administration, and a former secretary of state, who refuse to say radical islamic terrorism.

immediately after taking office, i will ask my generals to present to me a plan within 30 days to defeat and destroy isis.

this will require military warfare, but also cyber warfare, financial warfare, and ideological warfare – as i laid out in my speech on defeating radical islamic terrorism several weeks ago.

instead of an apology tour, i will proudly promote our system of government and our way of life as the best in the world – just like we did in our campaign against communism during the cold war.

we will show the whole world how proud we are to be american.

at the same time, immigration security is a vital part of our national security.

we only want to admit people to our country who will support our values and love our people.

these are the pillars of a sound national security strategy.

unlike my opponent, my foreign policy will emphasize diplomacy, not destruction. hillary clinton's legacy in iraq, libya, and syria has produced only turmoil and suffering. her destructive policies have displaced millions of people, then she has invited the refugees into the west with no plan to screen them.

including veteran healthcare costs, the price of the wars in iraq and afghanistan could total $6 trillion, according to a report in the washington examiner. yet, after all this money spent and lives lost, clinton's policies as secretary of state have left the middle east in more disarray than ever before.

meanwhile, china has grown more aggressive, and north korea more dangerous and belligerent. russia has defied this administration at every turn. putin has no respect for president obama or hillary clinton.

sometimes it has seemed like there wasn't a country in the middle east that hillary clinton didn't want to invade, intervene or topple. she is trigger-happy and unstable when it comes to war.

hillary clinton is just reckless – so reckless, in fact, she put her emails on an illegal server that our enemies could easily hack. then clinton's team used a technology called bleachbit to acid wash her emails. they even took a hammer to some of her 13 phones, to cover her tracks and obstruct justice. these email records were destroyed after she received a subpoena to turn them over.

in the fbi report, she claimed she couldn't recall important information on 39 occasions.

she can't even remember whether she was trained in classified information, and said she didn't even know the letter "c" means confidential.

if she can't remember such crucial events and information, she is unfit to be commander-in-chief.

her conduct is simply disqualifying.

she talks about her experience, but hillary clinton's only foreign policy experience is "failure." everywhere she got involved, things got worse.

let's look back at the middle east at the very beginning of 2009, before hillary clinton was sworn-in.

libya was stable.

syria was under control.

egypt was ruled by a secular president and an ally of the united states.

iraq was experiencing a reduction in violence. the group that would become what we now call isis was close to being extinguished.

iran was being choked off by economic sanctions.

fast-forward to today. what have the decisions of obama-clinton produced?

libya is in ruins, our ambassador and three other brave americans are dead, and isis has gained a new base of operations.

syria is in the midst of a disastrous civil war. isis controls large portions of territory. a refugee crisis now threatens europe and the united states. and hundreds of thousands are dead.

in egypt, terrorists have gained a foothold in the sinai desert, near the suez canal, one of the most essential waterways in the world.

iraq is in chaos, and isis is on the loose.

isis has spread across the middle east, and into the west.

iran, the world's largest state sponsor of terrorism, is now flush with $150 billion dollars in cash released by the united states – plus another $1.7 billion dollars in cash ransom payments. in other words, our country was blackmailed and extorted into paying this unheard-of amount of money.

worst of all, the nuclear deal puts iran, the number one state sponsor of radical islamic terrorism, on a path to nuclear weapons.

this is hillary clinton's foreign policy legacy.

but that's not all. president obama and hillary clinton have also overseen deep cuts in our military, which only invite more aggression from our adversaries.

history shows that when america is not prepared is when the danger is greatest. we want to deter, avoid and prevent conflict through our unquestioned military strength.

under barack obama and hillary clinton, defense spending is on track to fall to its lowest level as a share of the economy since the end of world war ii. we currently have the smallest army since 1940. the navy is among the smallest it has been since 1915. and the air force is the smallest it has been since 1947.

when ronald reagan left office, our navy had 592 ships. when barack obama took office, it had 285 ships. today, the navy has just 276 ships.

the average air force aircraft is 27 years-old. we have 2nd generation b-52 bombers – their fathers flew the same plane.

our army has been shrinking rapidly, from 553,000 soldiers in 2009 to just 479,000 today.

in 2009, our marine corps had 202,000 active marines. today, it's just 182,000.

our ship count is below the minimum of 308 that the navy says is needed to execute its current missions. president obama plans to reduce the army to 450,000 troops—which would hamstring our ability to defend the united states.

it takes 22 years on average to field a major new weapons system.

in 2010, the us spent $554 billion on non-war base defense spending.

in the current year, we are spending $548 billion – a cut of 10% in real inflation-adjusted dollars. this reduction was done through what is known as the sequester, or automatic defense budget cuts. under the budget agreement, defense took half of the cuts – even though it makes up only one-sixth of the budget.

as soon as i take office, i will ask congress to fully eliminate the defense sequester and will submit a new budget to rebuild our military.

this will increase certainty in the defense community as to funding, and will allow military leaders to plan for our future defense needs.

as part of removing the defense sequester, i will ask congress to fully offset the costs of increased military spending. in the process, we will make government leaner and more responsive to the public.

i will ask that savings be accomplished through common sense reforms that eliminate government waste and budget gimmicks – and that protect hard-earned benefits for americans.

government-wide, improper government payments are estimated to exceed $135 billion per year, and the amount of unpaid taxes is estimated to be as high as $385 billion.

we can also reduce the size of the federal bureaucracy through responsible workforce attrition – that is, when employees retire, they can be replaced by a smaller number of new employees.

we can also stop funding programs that are not authorized in law. congress spent $320 billion last year on 256 expired laws. removing just 5 percent of that will reduce spending by almost $200 billion over 10 years.

the military will not be exempt either – the military bureaucracy will have to be trimmed as well.

early in my term, i will also be requesting that all nato nations promptly pay their bills, which many are not doing right now. only 5 nato countries, including the united states, are currently meeting the minimum requirement to spend 2% of gdp on defense.

additionally, i will be respectfully asking countries such as germany, japan, south korea and saudi arabia to pay more for the tremendous security we provide them.

finally, we will have at our disposal additional revenues from unleashing american energy. the institute for energy research cites a "short-run" figure of as much as $36 billion annually from increased energy production.

using these new funds, i will ask my secretary of defense to propose a new defense budget to meet the following long-term goals:

we will build an active army of around 540,000, as the army's chief of staff has said he needs. we now have only 31 brigade combat teams, or 490,000 troops, and only one-third of combat teams are considered combat-ready.

we will build a marine corps based on 36 battalions, which the heritage foundation notes is the minimum needed to deal with major contingencies – we have 23 now.

we will build a navy of 350 surface ships and submarines, as recommended by the bipartisan national defense panel – we have 276 ships now.

and we will build an air force of at least 1,200 fighter aircraft, which the heritage foundation has shown to be needed to execute current missions – we have 1,113 now.

we will also seek to develop a state of the art missile defense system.

under obama-clinton, our ballistic missile defense capability has been degraded at the very moment the us and its allies are facing a heightened missile threat from states like iran and north korea. as these potential adversaries grow their missile programs, us military facilities in asia and the middle east, as well as our allies, are increasingly in range, with the united states homeland also potentially threatened.

we propose to rebuild the key tools of missile defense, starting with the navy cruisers that are the foundation of our missile defense capabilities in europe, asia, and the middle east. the obama-clinton administration tried repeatedly to remove our cruisers from service, then refused to modernize these aging ships.

we will start by modernizing our cruisers to provide the ballistic missile defense capability our nation needs; this will cost around $220 million per modernization as we seek to modernize a significant portion of these 22 ships.

as we expand our navy toward the goal of 350 ships, we will also procure additional modern destroyers that are designed to handle the missile defense mission in the coming years.

accomplishing this military rebuild will be a fifty-state effort —every state in the union will be able to take part in rebuilding our military and developing the technologies of tomorrow.

in addition, we will improve the department of defense's cyber capabilities. hillary clinton has taught us all how vulnerable we are to cyber hacking.

which is why one of the first things we must do is to enforce all classification rules, and enforce all laws relating to the handling of classified information.

hillary clinton put her emails on a secret server to cover-up her pay-for-play scandals at the state department. nothing threatens the integrity of our democracy more than when government officials put their public office up for sale.

we will also make it a priority to develop defensive and offensive cyber capabilities at our u.s. cyber command, and recruit the best and brightest americans.

one of my first directives after taking office will be asking the joint chiefs of staff, and all relevant federal departments, to conduct a thorough review of united states cyber defenses and identify all vulnerabilities – in our power grid, our communications systems, and all vital infrastructure. i will then ask for a plan to immediately protect those vulnerabilities. at the same time, we will invest heavily in offensive cyber capabilities to disrupt our enemies, including terrorists who rely heavily on internet communications.

these new investments in cybersecurity, and the modernization of our military, will spur substantial new job creation in the private sector and help create the jobs and technologies of tomorrow.

america must be the world's dominant technological powerhouse of the 21st century, and young americans – including in our inner cities – should get these new jobs.

we must also ensure that we have the best medical care, education and support for our military service members and their families – both when they serve, and when they return to civilian life.

our debt to our men and women in uniform is eternal.

to all those who have served this nation, i say: i will never let you down.

we will protect those who protect us.

and we will follow their example of unity. we will work across all racial and income lines to create one american nation.

together, we will have one great american future.

we will be one people, under one god, saluting one american flag.

america will be a prosperous, generous and inclusive society.

we will discard the failed policies and division of the past, and embrace true american change to rebuild our economy, rebuild our inner cities, and rebuild our country.

we will bring back our jobs.

we will make america strong again.

we will make america safe again.

and we will make america great again.
